SPEAKER_00:
All right welcome everyone it's October 24th 23 and we're in our first discussion of chapter three for cohort five so before we go to any specific question does anyone just want to give any first thoughts or reflections on three just where it is in the textbook or um what stuck with them or what they remember from the journey

Ali, want to give any first thoughts or anyone else?


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, sure.

Well, chapter three, as opposed to chapter twos, kind of bottom up approach or the low road takes the more daunting or let's put it this way, the more adventurous route of the high road, which is the one that's been increasingly developed in the recent years.

So it begins with the notion of

uh what it is uh it or let me put it this way if we suppose that code unquote things exist in an environment or in the world at large what characteristics should they possess to consider them as

ontological things.

In other words, what characteristics should they possess if we want to kind of re-evaluate or re-measure them at a specific time scale and consider them as consistently the same thing.

So the idea is if we put a kind of statistical boundary between the internal states of that object or the thing

And its external state or its environment, then it would be possible to.

To underwrite the dynamics of.

The of the internal states of the system at face of the changing environment, given that markup blanket or.

this or the statistical boundary so in other words the internal states of the system does not change directly

in response to the changing environment.

But the relationship between those two states are kind of, they kind of vicariously influence, the external states vicariously influence the internal states.

So they don't have direct access, but only through the blanket states or Markov blanket.

So that's basically the idea for the

self-organized object um and uh it's it's one of the main main properties for any living thing or uh rather

an idea for how life works.

I mean, by life here, I mean in a very broad term and not just necessarily biological life, but it also encompasses any kind of artificial life as well, such as xenobots as developed by Michael Levin's lab or any other

organoids or similar entities that's been increasingly appearing in many various disciplines and research areas.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

That's a great summary.


SPEAKER_07:
Christoph, then anyone else who raised their hand?


SPEAKER_09:
I just wanted to ask, because the concept of marker

blanket as sort of a separation between the internal and external environment, it always makes me think is that isn't it really kind of talking about temporal separation?

that ultimately what really says that we have states that we can identify that are not directly influenced by the environment, but ultimately the system is connected, so the separation eventually breaks down.

The signal gets through the barrier and finally influences the internal states.


SPEAKER_00:
there's a lot of pieces there first to the last piece yes the signals do get through they do influence so there's causal propagation that can reify the blanket so blankets can exist as interfaces they do exist as the interface they also only exist over a certain spatial or temporal time scale and then you in the beginning described like time in a Markovian sense and that's like a more common usage of the Markovian properties through time like

The past only influences the future through the present.

So then the current moment is a Markov blanket in time.

So you could make a Markov blanket around any Bayes graph.

You write the Bayes graph out.

You pick the node as internal.

That's the system of interest internal states.

There is a Markov blanket.

So that could be through time.

You could have one variable through time and talk about Markovian property through time.

It could be spatially embedded.

And then it could refer to spatial temporal enclosure.

But the concept does relatively little abstract philosophical work because by the time you define the Bayesian graph, it's basically trivial or deflationary where the blankets are.

And yet it has attracted some of the most heated philosophical discussion.

Yeah, go ahead, Rob Moore.


SPEAKER_07:
So I want to try to connect the formal definition of the Markov blanket as we're using it in this context with

What we humans seem to have, and maybe probably other animals as well, which is some intuitive notion of what it is to be a thing, because we look at the at our environment and

Maybe some of it corresponds to these partitions that can be defined as mark of blankets.

But we maybe see an animal, we see some system, and we identify this collection of entities or

properties this corresponds to one thing and of course we can look at it more closely and start to see more individual things inside of that that collective but well we do have some uh notion of of thingness that's quite uh very intuitive and uh to follow up on that is uh i want to understand what kinds of systems

uh we can reasonably describe uh through the idea of a marker with blankets to give an example uh i've heard chlorophystan talk about uh setting a drop of ink inside maybe like some water a cup of water and the dynamics of that um

ink drop, maybe not being describable or being describable with a mark of blankets.

Perhaps the fact that the ink disperses and doesn't maintain its coherence is what he's trying to point out.

uh this isn't showing that property of thingness you know uh remeasuring that we we see when we think about a thing um so yeah i want to get a sense for what's what uh kinds of systems whether they're biological or not uh are we is it reasonable to describe using that the idea of a market blanket


SPEAKER_00:
yeah does anyone have a hand raised just want to speak directly to it otherwise just keep it up and then we'll get to another topic but first just what can you model appropriately with a markup blanket if anyone just wants to go for it my understanding is that any it's basically anything right because


SPEAKER_05:
If it didn't have that separation between itself and the environment, there wouldn't be a distinction between the environment and the thing itself.

The example of the drop of ink is one that I actually really like because it shows that a drop of ink will dissipate inevitably.

But if it was a living drop of ink used as a single cell, yes, it would be a constant state of dissipation, but also the cell is able to extract

uh, quote unquote energy from the surroundings, right.

By breaking down the molecules in the surroundings and using that energy to hold itself together and also to use the byproducts to make more components of itself.

So you cannot counters this dispersion over time.

Um,

Imagining that process to me is, you know, I'm a biologist and so on, but it's still very, very hard.

One example I really like is this bottle I have here.

Oh, my background is a little blurred.

But if I press this button here in this shaker, I make a little vortex, right?

And it's kind of cool because, like, it's making something out of nothing.

It's like you have just the environment and you have an input of energy that makes a lower entropy system, right?

that demarcates itself from its environment, which is made of the same thing as this thing.

And all you need as a battery is dissipating a gradient, right?

If you don't have the gradient, you have no real vortex.

And one thing that I don't know if somebody has an answer is, what is a Markov?

Does this thing have a Markov blanket just like a flame?

And if it does, well, it has to, right?

Because it's a thing separate from other things.

What is the, can we classify different kinds of micro blanks?

You know, like this is, this is very transient.

It's very thin.

It's uh, but that membrane, the membrane of a cell is a more, much more complicated blanket.

Um,


SPEAKER_00:
many many points just to very briefly note them because it's again it's always more time in between our discussions like yes it is about the cell and the ink here's the one of the earliest 2006 examples there's a snowflake so snowflakes are getting whipped around like your vortex external energy is going through the so what can you say about a snowflake well it's frozen

But what could you say if there were some snowflakes that also could preclude melting?

So that's why it has to start with a thing.

And a lot falls out from you starting with a persistent thing or a remeasured thing.

Does the thing have a Markov blanket?

This is the eternal realist instrumentalist question.

The realist language is yes, it has a Markov blanket.

Cells do active inference.

This organism has a precision estimate.

The instrumentalist position is you can model it with a Markov blanket.

It's as if it has a precision variable.

David Price- And so, whether we say that it's about what the territory is doing about what it has or is versus what we can do classifying different kinds yes absolutely.

David Price- transient wandering blankets, these are the kinds of things that many people are researching about because when you actually do have a system of interest these kinds of questions are just immediately the things that you need to ask.

David Price- i'm.

David Price- Jesse.

David Price- Go ahead, David sorry.


SPEAKER_08:
Okay, Jesse.

I may just interject for a moment to add another angle.

Sure.

Yeah.

Uh, okay.

So, um, another perspective for viewing, uh, markup blankets, um, uh, I mean, whether or not it is ubiquitous or, uh, or just, uh, it only applies to, uh, specific things is that, uh, okay.

So theoretically it is possible to draw, uh, draw some statistical boundary between.

anything that is sufficiently separated from its environment.

But for the things that follow or that have a kind of linear causal structure to their dynamics or to their interactions with the environment, this markup blanket doesn't say anything specifically interesting about the dynamics.

So the significance of Markup Blanket becomes more apparent when we're dealing with the systems with nonlinear causal structures to their interactions with the environment.

So the more nonlinear their dynamics, the more interesting things Markup Blanket can say about the

uh the the interaction of that system and uh it can uh somehow result in non-trivial um non-trivial elements of um describing of the description of the system so uh as uh dalton's active variable has shown in

one of his papers weak uh blankets uh it's not uh i mean the question of markup blanket it's not a question of whether or not but it's a question of degree so we can have a continuum of uh blanketedness uh uh if you will of different uh different degrees of uh

strength for that markup blanket.

So again, for linear systems, we have very trivial kind of markup blankets.

And as the system gets more complicated or more complex and with higher dimensional structure, markup blankets become increasingly non-trivial.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Ali.

Jesse, and then Susan.


SPEAKER_04:
Tom Preston- yeah that's really interesting what you're saying Ali because I mean the way that i've been viewing the mark off blanket is, I know that.

Tom Preston- There is, I guess, a temptation to extrapolate like a broader meaning about existence and thingness but i'm just kind of looking at it as a statistical tool to you know delimit inputs and.

Right it's like it's a way of organizing inputs and defining external states and internal states, because in.

The things as they are the number of variables of inputs is really difficult to you know quantify in that that broad causal chain and so that's maybe where i'll leave that what you're saying about the non linearity is is really interesting.

But.

in model making where we are like investigating specific input output relationships the Markov blanket seems to be very useful for us to be able to you know create that type of Bayesian graph and organize that information right yeah and also like


SPEAKER_00:
blanket only exists as part of the particular partition in relation to the rest that are being described.

So it's not like a blanket drawing exercise.

It's like a system modeling exercise, and then taking different system of interest as your internal state, you just, by definition, get a Markov blanket.

So hence, it does little philosophical work by itself, and yet has attracted some of the most attention.

Susan?


SPEAKER_01:
So aren't blankets, isn't there blankets versus blanket?

In other words, there's different scales.

And when you say partition, that kind of, maybe when you say partition, are you talking about Markov blankets at different levels?

And to kind of tie on to what Jesse was saying, aren't Markov blankets context specific?


SPEAKER_00:
Pay a lot there.

Let's think about a few more tangible pieces.

First, here's the definition.

So we're talking about the relationships of variables, not about the relationships of things in the world.

So any discussion of what a Markov blanket is slash does as the technical concept, it's not going to be supported or rejected by any feature of the world.

it's about the variables being related.

And then the partition is just the definition of what the Markov blanket is doing, which is a set of nodes, one or more, that are intervening between two other sets.

That comes into play when modeling how variables are connected.

So if we made a model of temperature in the room, and there was just one thermometer carrying forward through time,

We might have one model where every time point can influence every other time point.

But then for long time series, that's going to get out of control.

So a common modeling assumption is like, well, make it a Markov chain, a one Markov chain, where only the last time step influences the next time step.

So that was what was mentioned earlier.

Like that's a pure Markov blanket in time.

Is that a claim that there isn't like...

time effects in the real world well not specifically but then you could at least use that and say actually we're finding that the one Markov chain model captures pretty much all the empirical phenomena so still that's not saying that there aren't some time effects in some setting but just saying that it's totally sufficient for that case so one more question that for me ties it up is that when you say Markov chain versus the model

kind of relating a markov chain to a map yeah i think you can even go further the whole thing is a map we're only talking about cognitive cartography only map and then the markov chain is this motif where you have a set of chained states hidden states through time with a markov transition matrix b

that's the one markov property is that is that horizontal chain and so like you could have a probability matrix that is like on the diagonal it has things staying the same sunny to sunny 0.9 and then cloudy to cloudy 0.9 and then the off diagonals is like the transition between them

So those are some simple statistical models of dynamic systems.

And a Markov chain is when they're just chained forward in time.

The Markov blanket could be considered from a static perspective.

Again, that's not to say like organisms are or aren't dynamic.

It's just about the Markov blanket.

You could have a causal network that is static.

It's how Bert in his work in 55.0 today introduced the Bayes graph concept was with a static causal chain.

Just kind of contextual factors interacting like a structural equation model, but in a Bayesian setting.

And then you can imagine composing a base graph that has a spatial and a temporal component or a temporal and a perceptual component or a temporal and a perceptual and an active component.

And then when we have a base graph in time,

with something like perception and action then that is where we get the partially observable MDP but like Markov decision process was a term before and outside of this kind of Markov boundary as organism boundary discussion Markov decision process is just referring to the Markov chain and making decisions on a Markov chain

Yeah, it's an interesting topic.

And it's the heart of the high road, as Ali mentioned, because whether we're from the outside talking about remeasuring something, that's like, so then there's things that are static compared to how we're remeasuring them.

There's things that are changing faster than we can remeasure them.

So then they're not being detected as the same thing like gas molecules in a room.

But then there's some spot where there is like a temporal thickness and modeling.

And then that could be seen from either the remeasurement, the experimental position, which comes back in chapter nine, looking like this.

Experimenter observing something.

Or

to persist in time, that can be framed as a remeasurement of homeostatic attractors, rather than, for example, the maximization of a reward or utility function.

It's like, well, the zeroth level task is to remeasure in the homeostatic range.

not to be rewarded by values in the homeostatic range and then maximize reward, but to directly target the statistical measurement.

Any other topics or quote to a section that somebody wants to like go to?


SPEAKER_04:
yeah yeah just this whole relationship between um value and and belief you know the relationship between the value function and and um you know the the function of prior beliefs and surprise minimization I thought was a really interesting uh jump that I'd love to talk more about or to have some people's thoughts on


SPEAKER_00:
Which page or section or anyone can just give a thought?


SPEAKER_04:
Section 3.5.


SPEAKER_07:
Page 53.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah very related to the previous discussion replaces the notion of value with the notion of prior belief so you can contrast the sort of imperative to be value and to to the the um the base assertion to be value exists and then the imperative to be that it has to be optimized or maximized alternatively a sort of foundational assertion can be the thing exists

which might be kind of a neat assertion because we might only be interested in those systems that do fulfill that and then the imperative would be the kind of more boring and first level be that thing whatever it is be as it is as um and

instead of setting up even anticipatory.

So that seems to more closely apply to like, okay, the rock is just sitting there, the bird is just flying.

Okay, things just kind of do their own thing.

But then that's the variational free energy.

So then the next question is, well, then how do you actually get

snowflakes that fly and resist melting cells that don't just dissipate like an ink drop how do you actually get something to both be what it is and have a preference or realize its preference or have agency in realizing its preferences and that's where the expected free energy comes in

Again, making no assertions about the mechanism that any given system actually does to fly and avoid danger, but giving a statistical framework for the bird watcher so that they can say something statistical about the behavior that they're seeing.

And then the other side of the coin is like the mechanistic and the how, and that's the low road.

How is the bird of the bat avoiding danger?

Well, it's not actually doing matrix multiplication, but it's a whole question to actually investigate how, and that's the low road for each system.

But the high road is kind of the starting point for discussion because without the high road, it's like an admission that it's a purely hypothetical space.


SPEAKER_03:
then even that exists in a sense inks and then anyone else i just wanted to give an example about this um in my work often people act against their goal because the i was gonna say value but the the interesting reward for

proving their unconscious prior belief, I am the one who suffers, I am the one that everyone hates, somehow the organisms values that higher, this prior belief of identity, I am that thing, than actually achieving a goal that they set for themselves.

So to me, intuitively, that makes a lot of sense, that swap there.

Because I imagine that has to do with the...

deep affect that comes with precision evaluating your prior as good like my old systems work my old priors are valid so there is a high there around good affect i may be suffering i may be losing but i was right all along can't take that away from me


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, a lot to say there.

So in the affective inference work, they linked the psychological phenomena of affect to precision estimation.

So if things were more variable than expected, that was negative affect.

If things were more precise, it was positive affect.

And if things were as precise as expected, as variable as expected, it was neutral valence.

And so if there's an empirical track record of something being a certain way,

Like I've gotten out and gotten $1 each day.

I'm the kind of person who gets $1 and then now there's an affordance that is empirically not been taken.

Then there's these different mechanisms to explore like precision on policy or precision on sensory inputs.

Maybe the three is like surprising.

And so then it's like less cognitive overhead or just more natural flow to go back into an empirical previous way of doing it.

But then multiple models are constructed.

It's not just like, well, a toy model was made.

And now this is like, you know, people are going to be using this in a clinic.

It's like multiple models are iterated in a lot larger and a slower setting over the years.

And then more and more is understood about computational psychiatry.

Christoph, then anyone else?


SPEAKER_09:
I find it interesting to think about this, you know, this effectively functional of functional beliefs as a sort of, you know, this is that this is the meta function that we're trying to optimize.

And I often find it that when I talk to people about, for instance, the notion of free will, I like to say that we don't really have free will because, you know, if you consider really your circumstances very carefully, you will find out after, you know, sufficient analysis that there's usually the correct

uh way to act and uh you're only it only feels like you have this free will because you're acting under uncertainty and you're making a decision for for the first time so it feels like you're doing something because there is there is this place that there is a wiggle room but um you know this this really nicely fits with this you know notion of prior beliefs that sort of uh those prior beliefs make you what you what you are you are a thing because you have prior beliefs

And I like to use the term aesthetics because that really determines the kind of values you're going to pursue, the things that you care about, the things you find beautiful, the way you want to be.

That's kind of aesthetics, but the process of... So in some way, you can choose that.

but the process of how you're going to get to your preferred States that's predetermined by the by the by the physics of reality right so that's uh and that's where the kind of like the the distinction between having having free will having the the wiggle room having aesthetics that you can choose having this prayer beliefs that you can that that you kind of have to well you can't you can't choose them

If you learn how, then you get to adjust your precision parameters, right?

It's just a matter of practice to get the root access to the mind to be able to do that.

And then everything happens kind of automatically from that point on, because if you're an energy minimizing agent, you always know what to do next.

Find the juiciest pocket of negative entropy, go blow it up, and go about your business.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I mean, saying that a thing is or even has priors is the definition of realism, certainly a stance that people have asserted.

But also people can use the same formalism on that exact same system of interest or a different system of interest in support of an instrumentalist claim.

So the framework can be used to advance a realist claim, but at least from my perspective, that doesn't make the mathematics...

an assertion about any specific system or how any specific thing is it's literally to the exclusion of that that we have a general framework Susan um so I actually put about four questions in the in the notes I didn't know if you were gonna try to get to the questions um in uh should I look at it from here or should I go to the chapter or core five questions here


SPEAKER_01:
uh the questions yeah yeah yeah and and I guess specifically you know what was which one or what were to what were to look up to find it uh affordances okay um and and that it kind of actually pulls on both the thank you the questions in terms of inks and Christoph's um discussion in terms of you know are these can these be learned um


SPEAKER_00:
okay great thank you for adding them so Ali explains in the intro video at the top of the page Markov blanket is a boundary in the state space not necessarily a spatial temporal boundary came up today as well what allows the agent to be statistically separated from its boundary as observed through its blanket so I take it that the blanket is a lens through which the agent observes their environment

Yeah, a lot of ways that that could be taken.

But yeah, if we kind of associate Y with observation and the chain of perception, yes, the inbound dependencies across the blanket do map to like a lens.

And then also it's a great...

connection as some will probably see that actually in the category Theory like the lens there's probably even a deeper meaning of this too but for so we won't go into it but short answer yes would this lens be defined by their affordances so

The outgoing dependencies from the blanket, so literally the other side of perception, action, outbound dependencies, the space of the possible actions is defined by affordances.

But if the hidden state were a person, then their affordances would be the observations of the other person.

So these are not tags on the world.

It's not like this object is an observation, this object is an action.

It's like in this map,

with this as my internal state, then this dependency can be read as perception or as action.

affordances according to gibson must be learned yeah i mean there's really two things here there's kind of like gibsonology like what did this specific person think about this word which i'm always all for but the short answer is affordance is being used in a slightly different way in active inference not to refer to the direct agentic perception of an action capacity

but a little bit more from a modeler's perspective as just simply the action capacities, whether or not they're perceived without making any statement on whether they have to be learned or not.

We can model a pendulum with active inference.

So obviously the affordance concept doesn't need learning.

You can just model it without learning.

Does the distinction between active learning and active inference have to do with these affordances?

So yeah, this was a distinction that that one paper in the Discord mentioned.

Short answer here is you could have two agents with the same set of affordances move up, down, left, right.

And then you could set up the parameters differently.

So one of them sought to confirm its expectations about sensory.

Another one sought to reduce its uncertainty maximally about world states.

So those are all the parametric fine tunings, but it doesn't require a difference in affordances, but it might require a difference in how the affordances are being taken.

That's how you would know that the behaviors were different at all.

You could also make a model where there were different affordances.

So that's for situational modeling.

And then the question becomes very obvious.

Are internal state parameters referring to the edge of the Markov blanket state space?

Not exactly.

The internal state parameters are everything about the system of interest that isn't the interface.

So it's like the shell of the egg is the Markov blanket, and then the inside is the internal states.

Because when you take a photo, you're just going to see the shell.

So it's just the outer interface with perception action across the blanket.

And then internal state parameters are everything about that thing that isn't the shell.

And then together, the thing is internal plus blanket, because that's what moves around relative to the environment.

Does anyone else have any other takes on any of these questions?

Yeah, Ali, please.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah, so there's another...

rather simplified representational Markov blanket with regards to the probabilistic dependencies of the different states in the physics of sentience presentation by Carl Friston.

So if you search for this topic in YouTube, there are several different presentations, but

around the time before minutes or something, you can see a clear representation of markup blanket, which shows how exactly external states, internal states, sensory states, and active states relate to each other according to their probabilistic dependencies.

So I think that can be quite helpful.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Also, yeah, a lot of other pieces.

These are all great, great questions.

And it's one reason why there's such an emphasis on making degenerative models, because there is such a difference between the abstract relationships

purely within the active ontology just the sort of conceptual relationships and then when mapping it to a system of interest it's kind of like a 90 degree rotation with what you're connecting up connecting active terms to specific things and then when this is all accounted for that's all accounted for then that's the generative model but the textbook is describing like

the pure relationships with a stream of examples and boxes and kind of just different pieces, different discussions.

Another interesting thing is like the high roads describing the imperative, but the low road is, there's might be multiple ways to realize it.

So just again, to separate out how it's being done from why it's being done.

Verena?

Thank you, go for it.


SPEAKER_06:
I have a question and it might be connecting to Christoph's question of free will.

There is a sentence in chapter three, I don't know where, I'm so sorry, but what it says is that there is this, when you,

maximize actually the free energy where you keep your options open until you have and i guess does it mean until i have enough evidence that i can state the belief and would it be a demonstration of free will that's my question that's a great great question it's kind of cool it comes up twice


SPEAKER_00:
In the low road, so kind of as a previously identified pattern of Bayesian statistics, just having nothing to do with modeling cybernetics.

And then here, the maximum entropy principle of Jaynes, the imperative to explain things as accurately as possible, but also keep options open.

Ollie, do you want to give a thought on this?


SPEAKER_08:
uh so yeah i think uh the question of free will related to active inference you see because um as far as i understand it um active inference is a kind of framework uh that puts the agency at its center stage right uh so uh the minimal definition of uh agency for the

for us to endow or confer agency to any system.

It can be put in its most minimal sense this way.

So if there is more than one way to respond to a stimulus,

uh and uh the other condition would be uh if the the system or the agent has a way to choose among uh those responses then uh we can probably say it has some minimal sense of agency so in this sense i believe active inference models or um or the agents that's modeled with um

markup blankets and inactive inference frameworks, they have indeed this minimal agency to them.

But if we go a little bit deeper than that and consider the deeper generative models and deeper hierarchies, then we would come across agents with beliefs about their beliefs.

We can, of course, continue that

ad infinitum theoretically so beliefs about beliefs about beliefs and so on and the more deeper the generative model gets the more sentient or let's say probably more conscious the agent will become but in any case even for the most simple case of active particles we can

describe agency with regards to these minimal definitions.

So I believe active inference and Bayesian mechanics put agency or rather free will

as some of its core tenets for describing those systems.

So it is written to the core of active inference, this conception of agencies, and it's something that we cannot take for granted, even if that kind of agency is not a so-called real agency, but just a kind of apparent agency, or in other words, a kind of agency that

appears as if the system has.

I'm not sure how it addresses the question of whether or not there is free will for these kinds of agents, but I think it can be seen as some kind of

a minimal framework to address these questions as well.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

I'll offer another position, which is the maximum entropy principle also applies to gas molecules in the room and the temperature.

So I think even in this discussion, we've heard some positive and negative attributions of free will and active inference.

But then the question that we can still circle around is, well, what's the relationship between the technical and analytical maximum entropy principle connected to all this other stuff?

For example, the constrained maximum entropy principle being dual to the FEP.

more recently being found out but how does any of those principles relate to how somebody mobilizes an account of a certain biological system for example that's even a different kind of question Susan yeah well along those lines I was just reading something about metacognition and um and some studies done um that uh that relate


SPEAKER_01:
the difference it made when students were actually taught how to think about their beliefs differently.

And so I think that for me, that kind of brings in the belief updating and the learning, you know, as part of agency, because even though I had different options, I may, you know, I'm assuming that, you know, the Markov blanket can also retract

Barbara Kirby- Depending on my state.

Barbara Kirby- And yeah that's kind of hollow out opportunities.

Barbara Kirby- I can't see my affordances, even though they're there, would that be.

Barbara Kirby- That be.

Barbara Kirby- A am I pulling those threads together correctly, I guess.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's great.

Thank you.

Just so we can hear from everybody in the last minutes.

Brenna, then Christoph, then Jesse.


SPEAKER_06:
And I have another question.

It's page 58.

and the first sentence.

Furthermore, active inference is largely coherent with ideomotor theory, which states that action starts with an imaginative process.

uh has there been some work done what this imaginative process is or um or what what's part of the process and how it is yeah is there any any research group do you know anyone or does anyone know about this kind of imaginative process which triggers the action


SPEAKER_00:
That's a great question.

I think you'd find that in essentially all prospective act-inf generative models, you could interpret it coherently with idea motor.

Like if you chose to associate policy selection with ideas, then the policy that gets selected would have arisen from a imaginative compositional process that triggers action.

um there may also be people working more on the um psychological side but not I mean you can look it up or or post in Discord or continue to explore but but I think that it's a cool question and topic because uh um I mean imaginative process is a process viewed from a human not really from maybe a cell or something I guess I don't know that's uh


SPEAKER_06:
That's why I was like a bit triggered by that expression.

So I wasn't sure about what it was addressed to.

Thank you for the clarity.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's like we come to it from so many different ways.

Well, what if a computer program makes new compositions?

Is that imaginative?

That doesn't need to be the claim that a human process is the same as a computer process, but if they can be modeled with the same formalism, then from an instrumentalist perspective, it's just like saying, well, we could measure a squirrel and a bird with the same meter stick.

That makes limited claims about different animals and how similar or different they are.

Jesse, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_04:
Adrian Holovaty, yeah I like the really thinking about that relationship between variational free energy and maximum entropy.

Adrian Holovaty, sort of in the risk management framework in a way it's like engaging in this you know it isn't just a matter of like prediction error minimization but also risk managing predictions.

Adrian Holovaty, In a certain respect.

So that topic just made me think like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it would be a risk to over or under fit.

If you under fit the distribution, you'd be leaving information out.

You wouldn't have as much awareness as you could.

If you over fit, it would be fallacious in a different way.

So you'd want to be at the right distribution given what you knew.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, it's an interesting framework.


SPEAKER_00:
Totally agreed.

Reza, then Christoph.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi.

So going back to something Jesse raised about section 3.5 and the active inference side, where it begins by describing how behavior results in reinforcement learning versus active inference.

I was just thinking from a practical perspective, do you know of any examples where the simple reinforcement learning examples

have also been implemented in code uh to demonstrate how the active inference approach to that would be like the cardboard card poll example or some some something um yeah cool the code page you'll find several dozen um applications


SPEAKER_00:
and especially the work of um alex chance nor sajid connor heinz and others baron millage those tend to directly tackle and juxtapose non-active inference machine learning

and and we've had a many live streams on the mountain car the multi-armed bandit several other kind of classical settings that make the comparison pretty um clear Christoph and then anyone else with the last word uh yeah I just want to say about this you know keeping keeping your your options open it always reminds me of this um


SPEAKER_09:
fantastic thing that the inestimable Terence McKenna said in one of his raves that he was asking this question like, why us?

Why is the mushroom revealing the secrets of the universe to us?

And he said, well, because I don't believe in anything.

I entertain ideas.

And I try to apply it definitely in my life.

Whenever I think I'm convinced that I understand something, that this is true and that is not true,

I look back to that and also to the teaching of the Buddha and think to myself, like, no, the answers are never really that simple.

The question of free will simply might not have a binary answer.

It's just as simple as that.

It's complicated.

It's a process.

And we may not be able to determine one way or another because it simply might not be determinable in that way.

The fact that the syntax permits us to make a statement doesn't mean it's a valid statement to make.

um so that's uh keeping your options open yeah that's uh that's a that's an important thing to meditate on um you know every day what do I believe nothing I gather evidence for um for the existence of ideas a lot of different perspectives to take great times well thank you everybody we will come back next week in the earlier time for oh it'll be Halloween


SPEAKER_00:
chapter three a spooky adventure okay um costumes are optional thank you everybody see you next time thank you everyone bye bye thanks everyone