## yNubOHOJeIQ

SPEAKER_02:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It is ACT-INF Lab live stream number 44.0.

It's May 13th, 2022.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find more information at the links on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

If you want to learn more about the live streams or other activities in the lab, head to ActiveInference.org.

Today in 44.0, we are going to learn and discuss this awesome paper, Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference from 2022 by Zoe McParlin, Francesco Ceratelli, Carl Friston, and Jorge Estevez.

And the video is just an introductory review slash scoping and contextualizing.

We're going to have some discussions in the coming weeks on this paper with the authors and some non-authors.

So we're just going to be overviewing the paper, opening up some threads, getting excited about it, covering what they said so that we can jump into the dot one and dot two discussions.

And let's just get right into it.

I'm Daniel and I'm a researcher in California.

I was very curious about touch and active inference, which is an area that hasn't been explored too much, but it's something that is so critical to our daily experience.

So it sounds like a pretty important area to model or approach with active inference.

And I'll pass it to Ian.

So thanks for joining and for all the contribution on the slides.

We'd love to hear any context and welcome.


SPEAKER_00:
Hi, Daniel, thanks very much for having me in your lab.

So yeah, I, you know, I was drawn to this paper for several reasons.

I first saw the paper by some of the authors that got me joining the dots between their work and your lab, which was that was called osteopathy and mental health and embodied predictive interoceptive framework.

So I've got an interest in

How we sense what's going on inside our body from a research point of view and a personal point of view.

And then also, you know, my main what I spend most of my time doing work wise is hands on therapy.

So manual therapy, which involves touch therapy.

When I saw the title of this paper, what we're talking about today, which is part of their series on inactivism and active inference in the therapeutic alliance, what jumped out to me was the word synchrony in therapeutic alliance.

So this is something in the therapy world

We often talk about synchrony, and I'm intrigued to see how that might fit in with re-energy minimization.


SPEAKER_02:
Just one thought on what you said there about interoception, which is something we've talked about.

I know you've had many conversations and works on it is touch.

It sometimes feels like it's out there.

Like I'm touching objects on my desk.

It's how they are out there.

Just like vision is something out there, but then touch is actually...

inside the fingers and so it's actually like it is an interoception about the external world so it's kind of like touch is something inside of us but again it's out it's about external objects and so how does the brain and body do that and then what's the social dynamics of it and then what are the clinical implications i hope those are some questions we can approach with active inference and get some insight into


SPEAKER_00:
yes yeah and the you know the other thing what you were saying then about um and i think in the interception researchers there is a little bit of debate over whether what types of touch might include as interoceptive or inner felt and there's glow effective touch versus maybe different types of touch um but also when you were saying that i was just thinking you know um

someone says i felt touched by that piece of music um the music didn't physically touch us apart from oscillating airwaves but touching our eardrums um but again it might be an interceptive experience if we were touched by some piece of music and it sent shivers up and down my spine so um yeah and can

Voice maybe in therapeutic alliance, vocal, auditory input, touch people.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

So we wrote out one view of a big question, which is kind of like a curiosity or an openness that might approach somebody to this paper, even without bringing active inference into it.

And it says, within a therapeutic alliance, can touch be used to help a patient usefully update their beliefs?

And then in the conclusion, the authors are where we're going to get to is touch appears to be critical in initiating the salience of synchronous relationships.

Touch can be used to infer and predict other states of mind, which are crucial for developing dyadic and triadic relationships in general and in a clinical setting.

So what do you think about that big question or what drew you to it?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, on the surface of that question, so can touch be used to, you know, help a patient?

So, you know, it seems in kind of the obvious answer is yes, it can.

You know, you see if a child falls over and a parent comes up and it kind of soothes the child by stroking it or touching it or rubbing it better, then we can kind of see

archetypal version of that of a caregiver helping someone who's distressed so i'd say yeah you know yeah it looks quite obvious but then you know this usefully updating someone's beliefs i think that's where it gets maybe in dot one dot two um we can explore that different uh more and you know what is

what is an adaptive update and what is a maladaptive update and who's setting the pollings and where does synchrony come in?

So yeah, loads to explore.

And dyadic, they've mentioned dyadic and triadic.

And it's therapeutic.

We don't have to just think in terms of a professional therapeutic setting.

So maybe in, you know, I can seek counsel from anyone.

It doesn't have to be a professional practitioner in a business type setting or a clinical setting.

It might be with a stranger on a bus.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

What are the top-down social scaffolds that facilitate or enable or constrain certain kinds of touch and clinical relationships?

So, cool.

Let's go to aims and claims of the paper.

So, as we mentioned, the paper is McParland et al.

in Frontiers in Psychology from 2022.

And some of the aims, the way that the authors represented what they set out to accomplish in the paper, one of them was to present an empirical integrative account of the biobehavioral mechanisms that underwrite therapeutic relationships through the lens of active inference.

And then they're aiming to argue for the importance of therapeutic touch in establishing a therapeutic alliance and synchrony between the practitioner and the patient.

And I think this will be really interesting to explore in the context of

uh explicitly manual and hands-on therapies and work as well as areas that are perhaps not seen like at in the same way as physical therapy or osteopathy but maybe the dentist just

puts the hand somewhere in a way that is calming, for example.

So even in not just the only manual areas and then some of the claims that they make and some that we'll go into a lot more in the

paper is they're going to argue that active inference provides insights into the why and the how of humans choosing to synchronize they're going to claim that touch is used to establish and also to continually develop synchrony in our lived world as social beings and those are some of the threads that they reference a lot of papers and uh kind of

explore it in the paper.

So anything that you thought about just in the claims of the paper?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, when I first read this, it created, you know, it seemed to remind me of

what I hear in other sort of therapies.

So the importance of safety, for example, in a therapeutic setting.

So if a person feels safe, then they're going to be more receptive to therapeutic touch.

And I'm interested to see on, you know, to read and speak to the authors maybe about what things facilitate synchrony.

And

The what else have we got there?

So yeah, just how the active inference framework kind of can potentially unify some of these different languages that we've got in different therapies that kind of maybe are saying very similar things.

And I think we spoke a few weeks ago, the beautiful simplicity of Active Inference maybe helps to unify those and help us understand them better.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_02:
All right, onto the abstract.

Perhaps you could read the first four lines, and I'll read the second four lines.


SPEAKER_00:
OK.

So recognizing and aligning individuals' unique adaptive beliefs or priors through cooperative communication is critical to establishing a therapeutic relationship and alliance.

Next bullet point, using active inference, we present an empirical, integrative account of the biobehavioral mechanisms that write therapeutic relationship.

Third bullet point, a significant mode of establishing cooperative alliances and potentially synchrony relationships is through extensive cues generated by repetitive coupling during dynamic touch.

And then established models speak to the unique role of affectionate touch in developing communication, interpersonal interactions, and a wide variety of therapeutic benefits for patients of all ages, both neurophysiologically and behaviorally.


SPEAKER_02:
The purpose of this article is to argue for the importance of therapeutic touch in establishing a therapeutic alliance and, ultimately, synchrony between practitioner and patient.

We briefly discuss a therapeutic alliance in prosocial and clinical interactions.

We then discuss how cooperative communication and mental state alignment in intentional communication are accomplished using active inference.

We argue that alignment through active inference facilitates synchrony and communication.

The ensuing account is extended to include the role of C-tactile afferents in realizing the beneficial effects of therapeutic synchrony.

We conclude by proposing a method for synchronizing the effects of touch using the concept of active inference.

Cool.

Active inference as a descriptive,

integrative account and then towards the end, potentially some unique predictions or implications or usages of active inference.

Like what would be different about the therapeutic alliance

if the practitioner and or the patients were to be aware of synchrony or be able to integrate some of these important qualitative ideas like consensual affectionate touch with potentially some of these ideas like priors and precision and synchrony.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And as you're saying that I'm thinking about, you know,

uh trauma for example which is you know when a a prior is so given so much waiting that it affects action and perception in a really strong way and as you said if if the both the the patients and the the clients in that alliance they're they're aware of it in terms of what the updating of that of those beliefs

in the whole process and aligned in their

the direction and the process that they're wanting to use to usefully update beliefs, then yeah, really interesting thought, being aware of the process you're going through.

Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's where we're going to be going.

And the roadmap is how we're going to be traveling there.

The paper has three sections.

introduction with a bunch of subsections the second section is mechanisms increasing saliency within synchrony and the third section is a conclusion and within this very multi-part introduction section they talk about a range of topics rain from physical touch and the clinical

and therapeutic setting.

There's a lot of discussion on the in utero initiation of synchrony and the way in which there's this transfer of the uterine environment to the postnatal scaffolding

through the post postnatal where I guess most of us are most of the time out there in society and the way that touch and communication and synchrony and all these other topics are sitting there in the therapeutic setting

and striving for integration.

And so they bring a lot onto the table with this paper.

So it's gonna be a great discussions and important lines of research.

And in this dot zero, we're going to dive into mainly the keywords and give some background.

It'll be awesome to hear about the perspective that you have being a lot closer to this work than I am.

And we'll just talk about the keywords and then be ready in the dot one and dot two to take it anywhere else.

Sound good?

Excellent.

Okay, the keywords are active inference, therapeutic alliance, affective touch, synchrony, predictive processing, allostasis, free energy principle, and perinatal care.

So let's just jump right into the keywords and see where it goes.

So first, therapeutic alliance.

What would you say about therapeutic alliance?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so while reading the text here,

therapeutic alliance is a collaborative working relationship between clinician and patients and is a critical component of the person-centered care because it contributes to positive clinical outcomes outcomes across multiple health care disciplines so um what i like here is that they're sort of saying that it's a critical component and then you know if we um

break down that term therapeutic alliance, then therapeutic, meaning, you know, helpful, I suppose, beneficial to the person, and then alliance, as they said it, so it's, I think of, you know, being in agreement and working together,

understanding each other uh which is you know i think sometimes when people are going to a healthcare provider it's um maybe the practitioner or the clinician is um

fixing them or doing something to them.

And maybe they can be passive in receiving that.

Whereas I think this term therapeutic alliance is coming for the person receiving the healthcare.

And then the active inference comes in.

So it's active for both parties, not just a passive thing.

And I see that...

Yeah, so there's another text there, which kind of says similar things.

So it's the therapeutic alliance is often modelled from a work the working alliance described by Borden in 1979, which includes the collaborative agreement on goals, tasks, and the development of successful relationships and cooperative communication.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah yeah totally true about the alliance and working together as a team and they're also focused on the dyad but i thought of like maybe a hospital setting where there's a lot of people of many different specialties working together like truly as a big team the family and the

the patient but also all these other people who come through that space and then just in terms of the way that this paper approached it they reference i guess a early critical citation board in 1979 and then also they reference two more recent citations um the mickey and ryu and so on the 2019 paper on the left

that paper was looking at physiotherapy and just highlighted like acknowledging the individual the giving of self and using the body as a pivot point so seeing that alliance as kind of like a constellation that's pivoting around the patient's body

and also there being sort of a broader scale movement which i thought was really deep and then the ryu 21 citation modeling therapeutic alliance in the age of telepsychiatry they just begin with something uh that maybe we've all experienced or seen occur that things are online and remotely and that includes psychotherapy happening online

And this paper is like a call for the investigation of the causes and consequences of successful psychotherapy augmented with computational tools and often carried out using computational means of communication.

So a little bit of a classic take.

on the therapeutic alliance as well as bringing it into the early 2020s phase that we're in where we're having conversations with computers but then where's touch and this disembodiment that could maybe occur if we don't have reminders to re-enter our body during these relationships yes yeah re-entering our body um


SPEAKER_00:
The other thing that I was thinking of then when you were sort of reading the early reference or the citation, the acknowledging of the individual giving of the self and using body as a pivot, thinking about that,

and something that's coming up later in the definitions about this expert, sort of synchronizing to an expert.

And maybe is there any tension there between the alliance and agreeing on goals and giving oneself to an expert?

So yeah, interested to explore that later.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

So on to Synchrony.

What is Synchrony, and how is it being used here?


SPEAKER_00:
So the definition in the paper, synchrony is defined as the interpersonal coordination of behavioral and neurophysiological rhythms that can aid in sensory processing, learning, emotion, and arousal regulation, self-regulation, and the establishment of communicative relationship.

So another extract from the paper,

Therefore, considering the therapeutic-aligned principles of agreement on goals, tasks, and developing strong relationships, a degree of biobehavioral synchrony will occur within a clinical setting.

So they seem to be saying that if it involves agreeing on where we're heading together, then synchrony has to occur.

And additionally, they're sort of saying that it is human nature to want to share physiological and emotional states with others through the structured pattern of communication between mother and infant, the interaction synchronize and interrelate.

an individual's behavior, hidden states of mind, and biological rhythms resulting in an intertwined unit akin to a sophisticated waltz.

And I see you've put some diagrams there from some studies involving drumming.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I was just looking to see how people were studying synchrony in the

modern time where they were studying various aspects of coordinated drumming.

And I also really like how the authors mentioned the sophisticated waltz.

or insert your own genre of dance or movement or coordination, because synchrony is not just lockstep, metronome, everyone doing the same thing.

Synchrony can refer to turn-taking or synchrony can refer to sort of joint improvisation.

And that's this notion of generalized synchrony that comes up again and again in active inference.

So what does it mean for there to be synchrony

in the therapeutic alliance with people who have different expectations preferences priors bodies minds lives so what is being synchronized that can be measured the heart rate or some other biometric features and then what is that reflecting and are we looking for lockstep but then if we're not what is this synchrony


SPEAKER_00:
with difference that we're going to be seeking and how is this related to positive clinical outcomes yeah yes uh so much um i could could go down there and uh yeah maybe in the dot one dot dot two and evolution as well this uh the regimented waltz versus the the more playful um jamming even


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Yes, we will go there.

All right.

So one of the ways in which synchrony is going to be engendered and one of the ways that is highlighted in this paper is affective touch.

So what is affective touch?


SPEAKER_00:
Quoting from the paper, effective touch via tactile stimulation can be viewed as an example of a particular embodied social behaviour that maintains homeostasis and influences the perception of or inference about the mental states of self and other.

Moreover, it has been speculated that touch may cause a rapid reduction in the activity of prefrontal cortex before instantiating a sustained period of preemptive homeostatic regulation.

It has also been suggested that the use of social touch

decreases the level of effort needed to overcome stress.

So here, you know, from reading that, it's sort of saying that effective touch is nice, I guess, compared to maybe a punch, which might have a different effect on our regulation, autonomic regulation.

And

So the next quote is, an effective method for establishing this cooperative alliance and potential synchrony is through ostensive cues generated by repetitive coupling during physical touch.

Affectionate touch is unique in its ability to foster communication, interaction and various therapeutic benefits.

For example, in the context of perinatal care, it contributes to an infant's development, both neurologically and behaviourally.

so again you know there's this assumption that um that the touch is gonna have a helpful outcome for the for the the party um that's receiving it or both maybe as opposed to other types of touch which might be um you know update someone's beliefs in a way that isn't adapted


SPEAKER_02:
The part that really stood out to me is like social touch, decreasing the level of effort needed to overcome stress.

Like a pat on the back, which is just one encultured touch that maybe in a different culture or different setting wouldn't be supportive.

But it's like there's effort needed to overcome some stress.

And then there's a pat on the back, literally or figuratively.

And then it's like, oh, it's less stressful to bring the effort back.

to do this.

And then that is not a punch.

Like you said, that would affect of touch.

And so what is happening when touch occurs in the body and in the mind, what is decreasing the level of effort and just what is touch doing in that setting?

And then how is that related to synchrony?


SPEAKER_00:
What is the belief that's being reinforced through touch?

So is it something like, I'm doing okay.

I'm able to cope here.

I am an organized being.

My free energy is minimizing, not increasing.


SPEAKER_02:
And then at the social level, like I'm there for you regardless of the outcome or something.

It could be many different things, of course, and it may not even be possible to translate it into language because this is its own language of touch.

So what is the grammar of that language of touch and language?

How do we make that affective touch, which sounds so endearing and intimate, make sure that it is that way for everybody who's involved in that situation so that it's not like for one person, like their intention is positive in giving or receiving, but then for the other person, it's like nails on a chalkboard, you know?

Cool.

Okay.

Well, the setting that they mention as critical for affective touch is like the in utero and also the perinatal, like post birth care.

So what's going on with perinatal care?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I thought it's really interesting that so much because, you know, when I first saw this paper, I thought it was about, as you said,

post-natal people, adults going for some kind of touch therapy.

But when you dive into the paper, there's a lot of time spent on looking at how young people learn.

So quoting from the paper, effective touch is unique in its ability to foster communication and

interaction and various therapeutic benefits for example in the context of perinatal care it contributes to an infant's development both neurophysiologically and behaviorally so it's contributing to their development and you know i've chosen a potter molding a piece of clay and you know thinking that

infants are we if we think of a baby as being like a wild animal um that's born and the caregivers are really molding it into being something that fits in with culture um and society sort of

uh and neurophysiologically and behaviorally then how does touch contribute to that molding um second quote interpersonal synchrony between parent and infant infant is well documented through non-verbal behaviors such as touch gaze voice particularly in mothers so there they're acknowledging it's not necessarily all about touch um

We've got these other cues, facial expressions, tone of voice that may facilitate or be involved in synchrony between the parent and infants in shaping their development.


SPEAKER_02:
The clay metaphor is really interesting, and it makes me think about how the baby, the larva, is born.

physically softer, like a lot of the bones are not converted to their final hardness and the skull has some openings and some flexures that decrease throughout life, but never go away.

And so it's like that also has analogy with like a Bayesian learning perspective, where in the early phases, there's like more plasticity and learning, more softness and openness of that statistical distribution.

And then there's kind of a hardening or a sharpening

of certain things to oversimplify that situation.

And then also one relevant paper that they cite is from Cia Junica et al.

And that's called the first prior from co-embodiment to co-homeostasis in early life.

And so that was like a very,

really rich contribution to thinking about co-embodiment and that is also moving the discussion of the clinical setting and bridging it with this ecological and evolutionary and physiological setting so this is a very interesting paper and and um something we'll talk about so on to part two of perinatal what what else can we share about this


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so some other quotes from the paper.

Often the first communication and connection with one's mother occurs immediately after birth through skin to skin contact.

This skin to skin contact is recommended because touch has been shown to help reset neural oscillators and align them with their parents' oscillation patterns in the neocortex.

particularly in pre-genual AAC, which I guess is the anterior cingulate cortex, all while reducing overall stress.

Additionally, a caregiver's touch frequently induces a state of calm alertness, which frequently signals to the infant that the caregiver is attempting to communicate.

When newborn infants coordinate their limb movements to the rhythm of the adult speech, this intention to communicate is reciprocated.

A strong bond between parent and child will amplify the parasympathetic response

to affectionate touch.

So yeah, what I'm noticing there is that they've chosen different examples of what might be oscillating or synchronizing.

So the neural oscillations seem to be something

back to your question about uh you know rigid patterns i think of neural oscillations of having a kind of relatively fixed tempos um whereas something like limb movement is you know it's not necessarily a certain amount of hertz um and so it may be more playful but um or

unstructured.


SPEAKER_02:
So yeah, that's interesting.

And one interesting part here is a caregiver's touch is signaling to the infant that the caregiver is attempting to communicate.

And so from our adult perspective, we might be more familiar or remember more recently, like a child tugging on our shirt with a child trying to signal that they would like to communicate.

That's like an ostentative cue.

from an active inference perspective, it's like a signal that is directing attention, but then this is actually looking at it the other way, which is the touch from the caregiver signaling to the infant who may be in a pre-linguistic state that they want to communicate.

And then also just this is a really transdisciplinary area to think about like the perinatal care in terms of touch, which they're looking at here, but also other mechanisms that they brought up like gaze, body language.

But then there's other features that aren't even explored as much in this paper's regime of attention, like the microbiome and the enculturation and so forth.

And then it's just funny, again, to think about the postnatal care does not end.

It just kind of trails and develops.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, you've included two really kind of big topics there, the microbiome and the appreciation now that passing on or

the microbiome from mother to infant is really, really useful.

And then bioelectricity, is that more sort of like the Michael Levin stuff?

And what I'm thinking there is that change from co-embodiment to... What was the other phrase?

Co-embodiment and something else.

Yeah, what's the...

Co homeostasis.

Yeah.

Uh huh.

Yeah.

Yeah.

So yeah, bio electricity there and can it return during touch in a therapeutic setting?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Okay.

On to allostasis.

So allostasis, the authors define in the paper, allostasis is a process by which the brain predictively regulates the body metabolic and energy needs using an internal model of that body in the world.

And so the citation there is to Barrett, 2017.

with the work theory of constructed emotion an active inference account of interception and categorization so that's um really uh cited and impactful paper that defined allostasis as the regulation of the internal milieu by anticipating physiological needs and preparing to meet them before they arise

So people might be more familiar with the more popular cousin of allostasis, homeostasis, which is sometimes seen as like the return to a target range when there are deviations occurring away from that range.

Like when the blood sugar or the temperature gets too low, a process kicks in that brings it back up.

Allostasis is highlighting the way that sometimes that kind of physiological regulation cannot wait until something has already left a controlled range.

And in fact, sometimes changes need to be taken in an anticipatory way to help meet expected changes that are upcoming.

And then also a kind of corollary of that is homeostasis would suggest that we would just be converging and staying within a target range, but allostatic behavior can include

for example, taking deviations out of the range, again, in service of staying in that racket before one goes outside into the cold, that's going to transiently be raising the body temperature in a way that wouldn't make sense unless the person was preparing to go outside, but then in the sort of integral of action through time,

putting on the jacket before going out into the cold is going to keep that physiological system happy and healthy and meeting its expectations in a way that's tractable, whereas being inside and not needing a jacket at that moment and then waiting until one was too cold and then putting it on then,

That sounds like some childlike behavior, perhaps, in the way in which different physiological regulators work.

And then just one place where we've gone into a bit more on the technical side of allostasis was in livestream number 38.

where we looked at certain cognitive and computational architectures and the way that they might evolve and the way that a simpler homeostatic system could elaborate over evolutionary time to include some allostatic features.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And what I'm thinking here is you helped me when you came on the Innocence Channel to...

about allostasis in a kind of use these ant colonies and policy choices of what the ant colony might do and I was thinking back to the temperature example not only do we think about putting coats on and building houses and control controlling our immediate environment but you're saying collectively

We have weather forecasters and weather stations to help our whole world predict into the future about how to take action on our temperature regulation.

Another thing then I'm just thinking what came to mind is we're going off the therapy.

the film Don't Look Up came to mind of this impending pressures on humanity, maybe climate change or whatever, and what adaptive measures are we doing collectively for the future?


SPEAKER_02:
yeah like a like a global or a bioregional allostasis instead of waiting for some toxic chemical to exceed a threshold what is the anticipatory action that's going to avert that from happening how can we

recognize and take effective allostatic action not just homeostatic for all the reasons why bodies do allostasis in addition to homeostasis and that concept of allostasis it does rely on this generative model that the entity is casting out into the future and

Very much in line with that is the framework of predictive processing and predictive coding.

We explored this more quite recently in livestream number 43.

And without going into all the details, predictive processing brings together a few big ideas.

First, it is going to...

hinge around the idea that what the brain or another cognitive system is doing is not simply recognition of, for example, incoming stimuli, but rather what's occurring is like a compromise down predictions

top is just a spatial metaphor here but the top-down predictions that are being met with the bottom-up sensory input that's a predictive coding or predictive processing architecture and that allows noisy or sparse or incomplete sensory data to kind of meet in the middle

with rich generative models of the world so that action can be done effectively again even when there's only partial data like a dark room and then also especially when we think about action and how to include predictions about not just future stimuli but predictions of one's future actions and the causes of one's actions and then the outcomes of one's actions in the world

this is going to return us to a core idea from active inference and this is a quote from that paper in 43 where the minimization of a prediction error or surprise or free energy with some slight differences but more similar than not the minimization of those terms can be achieved through multiple ways

The first two are through immediate inference about the hidden states of the world, which is related to perception, as well as updating one's world model to make better predictions, which is learning.

This is pointing to the relationship and the similarity between perception and learning.

in the bayesian brain and active inference and related theories and so the way in which you can reduce your free energy through learning and inference and perception and also reducing your free energy or your prediction error through action to sample sensory data in a different way as well as to potentially like change the world and modify the niche

So predictive processing brings together the anticipatory angle that we were just exploring with allostasis and connects it to specific computational and cognitive architectures that might actually be implementing that kind of an algorithm.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and where does touch fit into that?


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

And then just one more slide on predictive processing.

People can pause to read more or again, check out 43.

But one thing that Maria brought up and we've continued to think about is where do we use predictive coding and where are we thinking about predictive processing?

And so maybe another way to think about the difference between these two for the formalisms and the implementations

and predictive processing for a philosophical understanding that prediction is the basis of signal interpretation as opposed to description and recognition being the essence of signal interpretation or semiosis.

So I think it's referring to taking the active stance

not just with respect to action, but also with respect to our own sensory experience, which can feel, or one can be encultured to feel like it is a receptive process.

I mean, don't the photons hit the retina and don't the pebbles hit our skin and so on.

Yet even that,

how can we see it in a generative and in a way potentially even with agency?

And so here's some books that are in the last several years that are reflecting the philosophical and the neurobiological work that's being done in this predictive area.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and yeah, I really like that difference there between coding and processing.

If I'm thinking about touch and your comment earlier about one person might feel like a pat on the back or is...

is a pat on the back, but for some one person, the processing might be supportive for another person.

It might be like fingers down a chalkboard.

And yeah, with, you know, any type of, some person might, you know, most people wouldn't like a punch, but there might be some people who get pleasure from that.

from a punch.

So yeah, the coding and the processing.

Yeah, great.

Sensing and interpreting.


SPEAKER_02:
Great point.

Okay, finally to active inference.

So the authors in this paper wrote, active inference, which they use the AI acronym for, active inference is an empirical integrative model that has been proposed to explain the dynamics and biobehavioral mechanisms of cooperative communication.

so they cite the vassal at all paper from 2020 it's called a world unto itself human communication as active inference and this was actually discussed way back when in live stream number three this paper has many many interesting figures and formalisms

The top figure is these two brains that are communicating.

And it's fun because it's kind of like an equation-free version of active inference.

And an idea on the left side through behavior is invoking something in the communicative partner.

and that is updating their ideas, their cognitive model, which is reflected through their behavior.

And that is like a feedback.

So one can imagine this as like a conversation between two brains and bodies.

So it does bring in embodiment because there is the integration of behavior in the interface between these two communicating brains.

And it also opens up the door to thinking about like, well, how do we model ideas and cognition and things that we can't directly observe?

What would be different if it wasn't just behavior in the interface?

What if there was biofeedback or what if there was other kinds of interfaces?

So that's hinting at the flexibility

of active inference and also the way in which it can hopefully be insightful qualitatively or formally and then we won't go into it right now but in figure one is where we start to see what that formal layer looks like all states could be an entity and the niche like an entity in the world or it could be two participants in a conversation and then what are some of the formalisms that help us model that situation and

add in empirical data and ask what if questions in a really structured way.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

And as you were talking through those two brains coming together, I was thinking back to a therapeutic alliance and then thought about other types of nervous systems that might come together therapeutically.

So domesticated animals, if you've got a pet dog, then we might not be able to fully

communicate like you and i can with words and actions as uh deep in such a deep understand walkies and come to the door wagging its tail and there's a almost a therapeutic alliance if you know i'm stroking my dog and my parasympathetic nervous system is um there's an agreement there between me and the dog that there's an alliance that we're going to soothe each other

But we're not fully, you know, compared to a wild beast that might attack me.

There's a different, you know, very different coupling going on.

Yep.

The flexibility you mentioned.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

Yeah.

a little bit more on active inference which will hopefully unpack more in the dot one and two but the authors write about active inference referring to the inversion of bayesian generative models of the sensed world so we can talk more about the sort of recognition model and the generative model

And then they also explore in their unpacking of active inference, the ways in which perception and action are both in the common game of reducing surprise, reducing expected free energy.

So lots to talk about, but the big questions are,

Pretty much as always, what is active inference and how is active inference being applied in this paper?

And then this is the realism instrumentalism question.

Are the bodies doing active inference?

Do they have a choice to do it or not?

Or is this an approach that we're taking to model these bodies?

So is active inference the territory?

of the clinical relationship and or is active inference a map of the clinical relationship that's constructed about that territory and so that's something that's always very rich to explore again is it something that the bodies are doing that the physical therapist and the clients are doing or is this how we're modeling what they are doing then what are they doing


SPEAKER_00:
yes um ah so much to to possibly say about that yep won't go there quite yet perfect and then um what would you like to add about the free energy principle and about the bolin at all paper yeah so um uh i took a quote back from their other some of the authors in this paper were on the other

paper in the series on inactivism and active inference so there they said the free energy principle here in free energy is defined as the difference between a system's predicted state and their actual state

Thus, minimizing free energy means avoiding surprise to keep within physiological bounds and the entropy of the system low.

And a prerequisite for this notion is that different states are separated by Markov blankets, which define the boundaries of a system statistically by separating the internal states from the external states.

active and sensory states active states are governed by internal states but affect external states whereas sensory states are governed by external states but affect internal states free energy is minimized either by perception as you said on the earlier slide um

by updating the prediction based on the sensation or action changing the sensation through action to match prediction.

So when I read these last bits in thinking about the Markov blanket and touch, and you sort of said,

Is the touch internal or external?

And then I'm thinking about this co-embodied baby inside the womb.

Where's the Markov blanket there?

And where does the touch begin and end?

And touching someone physically in a therapy session or touching them with your words,

And when someone becomes synchronized and starts to minimize free energy, is there a new Markov blanket formed between the coupled agent?

Lots I'd like to have answers for.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome questions.

We'll go into it.

So that covers many of the keywords and background concepts.

Let's jump to figure one.

And so the paper has just very clear and delightful figures.

And this is figure one.

The caption is, an overview of the effects of touch and therapeutic alliance on the different networks of the brain.

So here in the center is a representation of a brain.

And then with the labeling of some different brain regions and networks and systems, they're referencing different empirical work over the previous decade that has been connecting different brain region function and activation to all of these

functions of bodies and brains and minds so what's one that's like interesting to you or what do you see or how do we think about this sort of um representation of brain regional function while also respecting the holism and the integrity of like the brain as a unit and the brain and the body


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I'm just going to sort of pick out there the person on the massage couch being touched.

And, you know, you've got the CT fibres there, C-tactile fibres, which maybe are involved in this slow affectionate touch and the word insula there.

So, yeah.

We talked before about that picture of fascia on your wall and, you know, is the connection between the seed tactile fibres and the insula through the connective tissue.

That's, you know, joining the brain, a region of the brain up to the person's fingers.

That stood out to me.


SPEAKER_02:
cool yeah it'll be awesome like to hear from authors and others just what kind of work did draw these connections and what are the next steps for developing that connection and understanding how there's synchrony within and among brain regions and within and among brains anything else to add on figure one um


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just the hypothalamus words just jumped out to me there.

So if we're talking about sort of minimising free energy and the autonomic nervous system, so one question that sort of came up when I first read the paper was,

we what are we on what level are we agreeing where the set points are that we're synchronizing towards or staying within so the 37 degrees c is the archetypal um temperature set point but not all members of a you know a duck egg has a slightly different preferred temperature than the chicken egg as it's being incubated and at what point in our evolution did

those birds cooperatively agree within their therapeutic alliance to adjust their step points and maintain that through whatever active inference.

Yeah, those sorts of questions.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

So on this slide, I picked out just a few words that were really jumping out, like touch as a core term.

And then the authors talked a lot about uncertainty, repetition, safety, empathy, synchrony, and salience.

And I found the paper of Mason, 2019,

and this safety and uncertainty framework, which is kind of interesting because in active inference, we often take a very formal approach to precision and certainty and confidence, approaching those terms basically how they're used in Bayesian statistics, like confidence is a hyperparameter or precision is a parameter that reflects the variance of a distribution.

And here's like a two by two matrix.

that is just saying where are we from certainty to uncertainty and safety to unsafety and that can be the physical and the social and the cognitive and so how do we find ourselves in safer situations while respecting the variation among situations and where do we want to be and something about seeing this matrix

gave me some certainty and safety, almost like actually it is okay to be uncertain.

And if it's harmful, then unsafe is not where one might want to be most of the time.

But we also cannot only stay in the pure safety area 100% of the time.

So how is the therapeutic alliance in our own lives outside of the doctor's office

how are we in these quadrants and in this way?

And how does this qualitative and kind of personal way of relating to safety and certainty related to perhaps more formal representations that we would bring in active inference?


SPEAKER_00:
Brilliant.

Yeah, and that, you know, those axes remind me of the valence and affect axes.

So uncertainty could be like...

Uncertainty certainly could be like arousal and calmness and safety and unsafe could be pleasant and unpleasant.

And then, you know, as you said, it might be fine to be safe and uncertain.

It might be fine to be aroused and pleasant, which is excited.

But I don't want to spend too much time excited because it is energy.

You know, it's from a free energy minimization.

It's quite maybe costly.

So, yeah.

Yeah, and where does the therapeutic alliance and co-regulation come into all of that?


SPEAKER_02:
What are we agreeing on is a good balance.

And safety and certainty are going to be very situational and related to that experience of the patient in this setting.

So how can we foster a setting where people with very different backgrounds and priors and expectations and preferences

can feel and be where they want to be in that quadrant.

Maybe they even have different preferences for safety, or there might be different preferences for certainty itself.

Okay, so.

adaptation to experts based on hierarchical structure.

And you have brought up this creation of Adam painting by Michelangelo.

So what made you share this art and what did you see in the section?


SPEAKER_00:
So when I was thinking about touch, I started to think, and I saw, I really liked this section of paper about

role of experts and i've not thought about it in what in that way in the therapeutic alliance so they used an example which was really helpful to me of um a child again going back to child and the parent is the expert and it's the through touch the child is learning how to maybe regulate itself or soothe itself um

So that's one example.

And then I started to think, OK, as we grow older or in different environments, who's the expert and who's regulating us?

And you could say it's, you know, peers.

It could be a boss at work is the expert or in the practitioner patient example, it's assumed to be the clinician or the practitioner.

But then I thought, OK, above that, we've got government and politicians.

And then I thought above that, we've got these experts.

symbolic maybe or from religion we've got the god as the expert and that's when i've sort of googled this picture and interestingly um on wikipedia it says that god you know if you look at that picture the god touching adam is um

the shape around him is looked like a brain and it's been supposed that that's uh you know um suppose the internal model of the the worlds um held in the the brain and you know which which model we held with inside us um and how is that turning out through active influence


SPEAKER_02:
Here's all the brain regions in figure one.

All of these other spirits and entities.

And then crossing the Markov blanket, tantalizingly close to touch, but with that interface between them.

But is there a space between with the shared gaze and the shared regime of attention?

So it's a very powerful interpretation.

We can do some more art and meme interpretation, because it's just really awesome how you shared that here.

there's a section in the paper on adaption of priors to achieve and that's going to be something we'll go more into detail in but in this paper they wrote the canonical loop of coupled action perception cycles is the process by which dyads generate and modify cycles until they achieve the end goal of aligning their mental states and communicative exchanges

This really highlights that we're not, again, talking about metronomes in lockstep.

Synchrony can include a conversation with two people with different perspectives.

So synchrony is something a bit more general or looser than just

metronome and the paper that they cite first in 2015 shows some of the interesting modeling that's been done around bird song and so they model a bird song conversation where um there's a shared narrative or they're singing from the same hymn sheet and without going into any of the technical details there's an expectation of how the song should sound like i know how some songs sound

and then a bird either finds itself engaging in the action of singing that part of the song and then stops singing after its turn duration has occurred and there's some reasons why it stops singing and then the other bird expecting the song to continue

can reduce its uncertainty about the continuity of the song through two ways, perception slash learning and action.

And so as long as your partner is singing, you're reducing your uncertainty about the song or the conversation by listening actively.

And then when they stop,

you might continue to reduce your uncertainty about the conversation or the song by engaging in action.

And so that's exactly what happens with this generalized synchrony and the synchrony manifold that's happening within one bird among brain regions, and then modeled in this paper of Friston and Frith with between two birds engaging in this bird song conversation.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah and that's reminded me of something else that stood out to me in the paper about this they mentioned a couple of times that

the basic, one of the basic things that is being assumed in a therapeutic alliance or hopefully is an end point is that we are all identical or we're all alike.

That was mentioned a couple of times in the paper.

And as you're sort of talking about the birds, you know, and their expectation that that song is something that they hear and that they're going to sing themselves, you can see maybe why music and music

language is helping us you know self-evidently perpetuate our identity um but then you know i think i heard somewhere it might not be true that um birdsong is soothing for humans as well so is it helping us remember that we're part of this community ecological community that uh um

I'm not identical in the species sense, but some other sort of a likeness or expectation.

The interspecies alliance.


SPEAKER_02:
mm-hmm one other section that uh they have in the paper is increasing saliency within synchrony so some important questions that we'll discuss more what is salience how are salience and synchrony associated how is salience similar or different to observation or attention regime of attention

And then they focus on a few different categories of mechanisms, including physiological mechanisms, social mechanisms that promote synchrony via salience, and clinical mechanisms.

So if it's about synchrony, again, not in the lockstep way, in this generalized synchrony way, like a conversation, therapeutic alliance as an improvised controlled novelty, productive conversation,

how will synchrony occur and what is the relationship of salience to synchrony is it a precursor is it a an after effect are they one in the same and then what are some of the mechanisms that could be fostered to increase salience and synchrony or what are some of the rate limiting steps that one might look at if they wanted to promote like or heal synchrony and salience


SPEAKER_00:
healing synchrony and salience.

Yeah.

And, um, the, you know, the, since the free energy principle and a lot of the active inference work uses exploits mathematics, it's, um, Steven Strogatz's work on the maths of synchrony.

And, uh, I don't, you know, I don't profess to understand it, um, but it'd be nice, interesting to see if, um,

that mathematics could be integrated with the fep math to help understand how like you say synchrony in these in something like social mechanisms might occur mathematically so in figure two


SPEAKER_02:
We have pulled back from the single brain.

Figure one, it was inside out.

We were in the one brain context.

And figure two takes us into the two brain communicating brains and bodies context.

And the caption is therapeutic alliance as active inference.

And there's a similar phrase.

aesthetic genre where now instead of the one brain with the brain regions being highlighted in different functions now we're seeing at the dyad with this sort of handshake or touch occurring between them we're seeing different functions and facets of the therapeutic alliance that are labeled with a through j so what were one of these like functions that stood out to you or you think is interesting


SPEAKER_00:
Hmm.

Yeah.

I'm looking at the now so the the looks like someone on some crutches, and then there's caregiver helping the person.

And then thinking back to the, you know, the alliance bits, I'm thinking what the shared goals might be there.

So, you know, it's, it's the the

the caregiver agreeing with the person on what they're going to do rehab wise.

And then how might that, when it comes to touch, help the person update their beliefs about how soon they can heal so that it becomes a smoother process as possible.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah and what i'm really liking about this it's bringing in some aspects of the therapeutic alliance and process that at least from what i've seen are not discussed in such a holistic way like f what have i done like just the confusion and shock when something surprising is happening in the body and it's like am i going to be able to use this finger again and

how could I feel selfish about having injured my finger in this way when others are in this situation and some of these like metacognitive states like H anxiety over the injury

The bark can be worse than the bite.

And then J, previous priors.

So that could be consciously or experienced priors, or just in a broader sense, implicit statistical priors surrounding the injury, including injury beliefs, social expectations, and family and injury history.

And so that kind of takes the predisposition, family history, epigenetic, perpetuating cycles,

discussion and puts it into this prior expectation preference framework like what does one expect health to look like given the types of health that they saw in their family development yeah in their family and maybe um culturally we've got uh these expectations about um


SPEAKER_00:
uh, obesity and then, you know, uh, the, what we're being, um, what types of products are available to us, what types of foods are in our, in our niche.

Um, and then when you get into epigenetics and all of that, then it soon becomes a very interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
great well i think this the figures are are very evocative and they'll be excellent for the discussions to just reflect on one other section just to leave a little footnote is they wrote about allostasis coordination attention and the stag hunt so they brought together all these very cool ideas

and brought it to the setting of the stag hunt which is a classical game theory and philosophy setting and this is a matrix that can be read as like a payoff matrix and there's two participants who can either choose to hunt for rabbit hair which has a smaller possible payoff but one can hunt it alone

However, if they both engage in the stag hunt, like the big prize, they can have a higher payoff.

So if they both collaborate and work on the stag hunt, they could both get half of a stag.

Whereas if they both go for the hare, then perhaps they could both be confident or sure or not sure about getting a hare, but it's like a smaller possible reward, but it doesn't require coordination.

And this has explored some of the philosophical and social implications with the citation that they provide to Skirms, 2001.

And this is just a very rich area for thinking about collaboration, coordination, public goods, what kind of pre-play

helps people go for the stack.

Again, this isn't just about meat hunting.

This is like a model of generalized coordination.

Like we could co-author an amazing paper or we could have two lesser papers that might take longer.

But of course we could also engage in the collaboration and get bogged down and then we could have no paper.

So how do we manage the risks and the reward of coordination and collaboration?

How is that related to shared attention?

how is that related to allostasis where's touch so they're really just bringing in so many rich threads and and i was not expecting the stag hunt to appear but then applying the stag hunt to the therapeutic alliance is quite interesting yeah um


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, they're the kind of alliance, the working together for the benefits of the alliance versus maybe giving someone some exercises to do on their own.

or pursuing self-care on their own versus care in an alliance way is, I've not thought about it in that way before, in terms of the group benefit of group work versus self-care on one's own.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, like a regional emergency room.

What does it look like for us to be cooperating as best as we can with the health needs of this area?

How are we going to be going for the stag together rather than succeeding or failing to get the rabbit alone?


SPEAKER_00:
And then, oh, yeah, go for it.

No, I think it's slightly off topic.

I was just thinking about, you know, more related to the stag, how we approach agriculture at the moment and, you know, the benefit of being able to get lots of food for cheap and in abundance on our health seems immediately to be a benefit.

But then for the overall health of cheap, abundant food,

long-term might not be that good as opposed to going out and moving your body and foraging on your own, which takes more energy, but it's better for your health, arguably.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

And then just one other random note or reference to bring in.

This is a paper that I worked on in 2018 with my partner, Alexandra.

And we were highlighting this communication and co-creation, not from the clinical therapeutic alliance setting, but from the joint drawing and joint improvisation setting.

But we touched on a lot of very similar things

topics about consensual and positive communication and controlled novelty and the narrative trajectory so i wondered where's art and aesthetics and beauty and some of these other ineffables or semi-effables in the therapeutic relationship you have a um a body

your wall behind you i have a body on the wall behind me the body is beautiful and where does art and culture and touch and healing come together well yeah you know the art is the expressed i would kind of um output of some imagery or symbols that the artist has


SPEAKER_00:
found within them and therapeutically you know the use of visualization along with therapeutic touch to update someone's belief so you know I use with my clients sometimes ask them to depict how their their injured shoulder what what image what vision do they get when they describe their injured shoulder compared to their healthy shoulder and you know one of them said um

The bad shoulder feels like a rigid piece of guttering on a house that's gone frail in the sun, whereas the good shoulder feels like

gooey custard um it's nice and warm and then you know how can you transfer that belief about the injured the injured shoulder into the the gooey one so you know you've got some potential use of art therapy or even just visualization and symbols to um in combination with touch and movement and conversation um so yeah very awesome awesome and then um


SPEAKER_02:
We have the open slide for 44.1 and 44.2.

We're going to continue to add questions in the coming week and people can submit questions or participate live if they'd like.

I'm really interested to do some discussion of like, what are the active inference entities that we're going to model

Is it the person?

Okay, then what are the sense states, the action states?

What is the generative model that we're going to actually put on paper?

And so where does active inference come into play?

And how are we gonna take the next step?

Because so many threads have been brought together in this paper.

evidenced by the keywords and the bibliography and so on.

And then what is the next step?

Who are the next audiences to update their cognitive model, to think and act differently?

How does the clinical setting look different in the ACT-INF hospital or in the ACT-INF exercise area or whatever it happens to be?

What does the therapeutic alliance look like in an active inference model?

And what are the next steps for those who want to be engaged in that work?

And yeah, we'll just continue to explore.

What are some of your any closing ish thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, wonderful paper, I'm really interested in, you know, how other

So this is written by a group of people who are interested in osteopathy.

The way I see it, it could be applied to talking therapies, other hands-on therapies.

So is this a useful common language to understand lots of different already successful therapeutic approaches and interventions?

The other thing is, you know, how do we begin to use some of the jargon that we might have been using now?

How do we find a way to

take the active inference language to people who've never heard of active inference before.

And then, you know, finally, the something that came up as I was reading, it's kind of an alternative hypothesis about this, you know, assumption that synchrony and the therapeutic alliance will always result in minimising free energy.

And, you know, I just had this thought, what if

within the therapeutic alliance, a caregiver and the patient agreed that they synchronized their quantum reference frame or whatever to say, okay, we're going to choose medically assisted dying here.

Is that still minimizing free energy or not?

And is it helpful for the person?

Is it soothing them?

So is it always minimizing free energy?


SPEAKER_02:
Wow, very deep with the birth and life control and the vital nature of what the therapeutic Alliance truly is.

So also, thanks for just this awesome discussion and all the dot zero slide making that we got to engage in.

So looking forward to the coming weeks of discussion.

Talk to you later.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you very much, Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Excellent.

See you later.

See you next week.

Bye.

## y1vtKYzVUaY

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's May 18th, 2022, and we are in Act-Inf Lab live stream number 44.1 on the Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference, the role of therapeutic touch and synchrony.

Welcome to the ACT-INF lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on the slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

If you want to learn more about live streams or any of the other projects that are happening in the Active Lab, head over to activeinference.org.

Okay, today we're in live stream number 44.1, and we are learning and discussing around this paper, Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference by McParlin, Saratelli, Friston, and Estves.

And we're really honored and appreciative to have a bunch of authors joining us today.

And also Ian, and Ian and I did a .0 last week.

So for any context,

one might want to check out the dot zero otherwise in the dot one today and in the dot two next week we're going to open up and develop threads have the opportunity to address any questions that people are having in the live chat or submitted to us otherwise and just take notes and have spontaneity and see where this goes because it's a really exciting area of research so we're just going to start with that

I'll say hello and then pass to Ian and then we'll hear from the authors with any context.

So I'm a researcher in California and was very interested in this integration of a lot of perspectives from like the ecological and the developmental and kind of bringing it towards practice, which I hope we can continue discussion around and I'll pass it to Ian.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Daniel.

So my name's Ian.

I am based in England.

I work as a hands-on manual therapist.

I have a background in

clinical and surgical sciences, but also do a little bit of research now around the topic of interception.

And this is where the work of these authors caught my attention.

The whole series actually on inactivism and active inference.

It's kind of where I've arrived at in the last year.

And I'm interested in

both how we talk about these ideas to patients, sort of in service of helping them, update the meaning they sort of give to the situation they're in, and also from a research point of view, you know, how we might be able to drive forward some new questions in research around health.

Thank you.

Over to whoever's next.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So I'm George Estevez.

I'm based between Malta and Italy.

I'm an osteopath researcher.

So my main interests are on, you know, the things we're talking about here today.

So inactivism, active inference, the sort of management of chronic pain and complexity in clinical practice.

A bit of background apart from, you know, osteopathy.

My PhD was exploring the role of multisensory integration during palpation.

in osteopathy, you know, several moons ago.

So that was my sort of early dive into, you know, this kind of world.

Back in the sort of late 2000s, when people start talking about Bayesian models to explain multisensory integration and so on.

So that's where kind of things started from.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Francesco Cerritelli, I'm based in Italy, and thanks Daniel and Ian for leading this interesting, hopefully interesting, live stream.

I'm a clinician of osteopaths, so hands-on treatment, and also a neuroscientist.

So my main interest is in exploring effects of manual therapies within the concept of interoception and the autonomic nervous system effects.

That was basically my main streamline during my PhD.

And then with George, we explored the active inference and activism in the last couple of years, and we're trying to also apply in the context of therapeutic alliance in different

age groups, so starting from the neonates, preterms, where actually we had also a big, quite a strong background, and then into all the persistent physical symptoms and also in the other age groups.

So that is the, so I'm just divided into the clinical part and the research activities.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Zoe?


SPEAKER_05:
hi i'm zoe i'm the primary author on this paper again i am a osteopath and this is my first paper that i've published i originally started doing a little bit of research on chronic pain and how it affects autonomics a long time ago and then about two years ago i reconnected with george on his

active inference and interceptive ideas.

And since then, we've kind of gone from there.

And this paper was published.

I focus as an osteopath on mainly touch-based.

And so I wanted to do a paper based on how touch affects things and kind of have a little bit more of the neuroscience behind what we do.

So that's, and active inference seemed the perfect way to try and justify things that maybe we as osteopaths or manual therapists maybe feel, but haven't been able to put down empirically on paper.

So that's how the paper kind of started about.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

So again, anyone in the live chat or anyone here can just raise their hand or ask a question, but let's just jump in right there.

Like that's really interesting about using active inference for formalizing some of the intuitions and experiences that might be

felt during the clinical setting.

So what is the clinical setting that you are engaged in or focusing on?

And then what was that process of recognizing some experience?

And then how does active inference fit in with formalizing that?


SPEAKER_03:
So, actually,

know a little bit of what i mentioned before the sort of early journey started with uh try to explore actually what we what we do as osteopaths you know one of the things or what we do as manual therapists one of the things we do is we first uh there's a kind of the big claims about what what we can do and what we can feel and almost like having this sort of magical sort of ability to

to recognize what's wrong with the patient.

And that was always based around this idea that, you know, manual therapists or osteopaths have superior abilities to feel for things, you know, palpation is really the big thing.

And based on a kind of a paradigm that's, you know, a little bit of old school, biomechanically based that, you know, dysfunction, altered mobility, for example, equals pain, equals problem.

And of course,

you know, as the knowledge in the field of pain science evolved, we started realizing that's not the case, you know, because, you know, what happens with chronic pain is there is no longer a tissue dysfunction in lots of cases, but there is pain.

So clearly, it becomes extremely difficult to find things, find things that actually are reliable.

And that sort of reliability is an observation and has been one of the big debates in the manual therapy world, which is

we cannot reliably find what we claim we can find.

So poor, typically poor inter-operator reliability, two people cannot agree on things, and including also very poor intra-operator reliability.

You know, if I test one thing and I retest that, I will not find the same thing.

And of course, you know, this is a kind of,

know some some important things to take into account if the patient has a real pathology for example a real joint restrict restriction of movement for example associated with severe arthritis then you know one should find something you know it's clearly there is is objective but what happens in most of the patients is what we claim to find are things that are very qualitative in nature very subjective so

So the initial kind of journey was really to try to understand really what's going on and hence the idea of exploring things from a kind of multisensory perspective.

Clearly what we find or what we rely on in the hands, it's not simply the haptic system or the smart sensory system.

It's a multisensory experience.

We see, we observe, we touch, we change.

We listen and that creates straight away an environment where there's so many variables that becomes extremely hard to say, yeah, for sure, this is what I find.

So, you know, you can have people criticizing for the sake of criticizing or saying everything is a kind of a, it's an illusion to other people claiming, no, it's for sure, it's true.

And I think, you know, we need to understand that actually probably we sit in between.

And more than 10 years ago now, I remember when I kind of started presenting some of the, you know, some of the research findings to my profession and implied the idea that actually palpation is a construct of the brain.

People got a little bit of, yeah, no, now can't be really, because, you know, how can you say that?

The hand is such a powerful thing.

You know, we feel things.

From a philosophical perspective, people were talking about, you know, the

hand is an extension of the brain.

So clinical reasoning, it kind of continues through, we gather sensory evidence by listening, by observing the patient, by

arguably using most of the senses, including smell, because I don't think we taste our patients, but smell for sure, you know, there are cases where a strong smell equals pathology.

So we get that information, we've been bombarded with that information, and we try to make some sense of it.

And, you know, it's down to the clinical reasoning.

So I think that fits nicely now with new ideas of, you know, along the lines of active inference, because

It's about active inference claims about how we construct our own sensorium, how we sort of integrate information, change things, proactively interact and so on.

Exactly what we do when we assess a patient.

We touch, we feel, we get a reaction from the patient either

know that hurts or i don't like you being touched or actually feels very nice so there's a number of things that straight away are going to happen that immediately one can argue changes the outcome so it's no longer you know what i felt now the second guy is going to feel exactly the same thing i don't think that is possible unless of course if you've got uh there's a there's a fused vertebrae between let's say c3 and c4 you know yes we should feel the same thing because objectively there is

there is a problem there.

But otherwise, where we tend to find how we interact changes the whole kind of environment.

And that's, I think, active inference.

It's kind of a nice framework to start, you know, exploring things and rather than just being on the negative side is actually to try and go a step further and try to understand, you know, some of the dilemmas from a different perspective, from a different angle without saying, you know, this justifies now everything we do, far from that, but actually trying to understand some of the difficulties, some of the tensions.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, may I?

Definitely agree with what George just said.

And what I would like to add to the discussion table is that actually we started also from an additional point.

There was the fact that

two additional points.

So the first one is that apparently all manual therapies has got an outcome.

So it's got positive outcomes for the patients.

So there can be an osteopath, there could be a physiotherapist, there could be a chiropractor, there could be any massage therapist.

So apparently the uniqueness of each kind of manual therapist

is kind of flattened by the relationship that that manual therapist can establish with the patient.

So, given, therefore, the importance of the type of relationship with the patient, it might also play a big role in the positive clinical outcome effects.

And the second is also related to the fact that the

based on quantitative research, the elements that actually pop up is that in some cases, and more than some cases, the specific application of osteopathic treatment might also be effective and with the clinical effectiveness across different age groups.

So from preterm to the elderly to the

to adults and so on.

That actually opens a very good question in regards to the real effectiveness.

Because actually, we know that from science that it is not possible that we are going to have always positive effects.

Otherwise, we are going into a publication bias.

So we are going to publish only the papers that actually are positive towards that kind of treatment so far.

So, in this way, there might be, therefore, the need for a paradigm shift towards the, as George said and mentioned, from the biomechanical way, and then modified by the BPS, so the biopsychological

the biopsychological model into something that actually might really take into account the environment.

Because in the

And this is also important because the evolution of the free energy principle and all the elements within this context actually take into account also elements that might, from a computational point of view, might take into account the relationship between people.

for example the mark of blankets and all the elements that actually are in contact between the practitioner and any manual practitioner in this case and the patient.

For the sake of the fact that actually we are touching patients and therefore it's a super powerful channels that also with or without words might also vehiculate and drive information towards a specific end.

Now, the other elements I would like to introduce is the fact that sometimes happens that we consider the reliability and inter-reliability within the manual therapist perspective a big problem.

But this problem is actually exactly the same for radiologists, for people in the

doing ultrasound.

Why is that?

Because actually, it was a beautiful paper published on BMJ probably 10 years ago, talking about the kind of statistical measure that actually has been used for reliability studies.

And it mainly is the Cohen scale.

that is one intrinsic problem with Cohen's cave, because actually it doesn't take into account what is the reality of the measurement of the radiologists, or the radiologists are measuring the ultrasound specialists, manual therapists, and so on.

So it's been implied, therefore, that that kind of the reliability, it's one of the most important measurement for reproducing and for generalizing what actually the treatment is doing.

And with this framework, actually, we are trying to get out from this perspective because within the context of a therapeutic alliance and when actually we take into account

where we look after patients, it's not just the fact that actually we can reproduce the treatment, because the treatment is just one element of the plethora of the broad elements of the instruments and tools that within the session we are applying.

So it's just reducing like a funnel the fact that actually we need to reproduce exactly that kind of dysfunction or problems in the column.

But the problem in the column might be also affected the way in which we establish a relationship with the patient.

And back in the days, the BMJ paper was just a brilliant way of looking at one of these main effects from a different perspective.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

Awesome.

Zoe?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so to add on to what George and Francesco said, this paper mainly focuses on more private practice than sort of a hospital setting.

Obviously, it's a framework, so it can be applied.

But generally, we're talking about more dyadic or triadic relationships within clinic as the setting.

and we've primarily focused on manual therapy but the theories of active influence and everything can be applied to others like psychotherapy and things like that as well just to point that out but yes like Francesco and George said we're mainly using touch as sort of the vehicle but there's a lot more that's going on sort of with the way that we communicate and the different aspects of

like the biopsychosocial model, which now I'm sort of expanding upon, but there's a lot more to it than just the vehicle of touch to make therapeutic alliance.

I think the therapeutic alliance is interesting.

There's a lot of research that's been done for a very long time on the therapeutic alliance itself, what it is and why it's important, but there's not actually that many theories to the sort of the neuroscience or things like active inference behind therapeutic

why it's important.

All the research will tell you that you can get better clinical results, and better relationships, better trust with the patients, more adherence, lots of different positive effects of the therapeutic alliance, but not always sort of explaining how the therapeutic alliance works, or how to best achieve it.

That's kind of not always

um, express.

So this is kind of a way that we've tried to quantify how to affect, um, to gather all the different, um, parts of the, that go on to create the therapeutic alliance instead of one framework.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome.

A lot there.

Ian, do you have any thing to add or I'll ask you a question?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, thank you.

Well, lots of tantalizing stuff there.

And what I really love is the openness of all of this question asking.

several sort of things from the paper that or topics from the paper i'd like to explore but one thing that's coming out to me now um is this role of the expert and the model of the expert that might be leading where things are synchronizing towards between the therapeutic alliance and um so what i'm sort of

into mind as I was hearing that is sometimes is it the patient that's the expert or allowing the patient to be the expert or taking turns in being the expert so you know it might be the the

therapist says, oh, you know, based on my model, my past experience, my priors, the palpation that we're doing now makes me think maybe it's the tightness in your traps that's causing this pain.

But then actually, you know, the patient says,

you know, takes on the role of the expert and says, based on my prize, actually, you know, I've often had tight traps and it's never been a problem.

And I'm actually, what I'm feeling is maybe nausea in my stomach because of all this exam pressure I've got, or,

stress with my family members and then you know then it's another cycle of experts swapping over and exploration so it's more of a exploration the touch is um helping with exploration of the models between

the co-embodiment between the patient and the practitioner.

The other thing, when you were talking about the machines in the hospital, the radiologist or the MRI scanner, I was thinking also about the hand as a machine and

a blind person builds up this sensitivity to be able to read braille.

So they're palpating a piece of paper with braille on it, and maybe it says, John went to the shops and bought an apple.

But the blind person would never look at that pattern and think,

that there's a person called John eating an apple inside the paper.

But the symbols that are being created as they feel that, they'll see an image of an apple and John, and maybe it'll bring up feelings and emotions.

And I just wonder if sometimes it's confusing the sensory input with the feelings and the images, and how do we overcome that and not confuse the moon with the finger pointing at it?


SPEAKER_03:
so yeah lots lots of lots of questions please okay um it's they're very good questions by the way um i think that the whole issue about taking turns i think it's it should be the essence of it uh one cannot argue that

It's always the expert as a practitioner.

If we do that, I think we end up in a situation where clinical practice relies on that expert, the top-down kind of approach.

I know best because I'm the healthcare professional, healthcare provider, and therefore, I know what's wrong with you.

That's kind of the...

that's away from the model of person-centered care.

One expects really that practitioner and patient, or Zoe alluded to the concept of a triadic relationship, where, for example, in pediatric care, there's a baby there, and it's a conversation with the mother or the father, or sometimes in geriatric care, there's a conversation with, you know,

for example, the daughter or the son of the older person and so on.

So that taking in turns, I think there are clearly we need to think about the person is expert in their own body.

And I personally tend to ask my patients, you know, what, in your opinion, what do you think is wrong with you?

You know, ultimately, you are the expert in your own body.

And clearly, if it's something kind of new, you know, the system becomes

better detecting something that you know what's going on here uh kind of you know something that requires some attention but clearly when when in in cases for example of chronic pain the system becomes extremely good relying on the priors on the on a very strong generative model too so yeah this is pretty much what always happens when i get stressed

you know, I typically get, you know, start worrying about, I start getting some butterflies in my tummy and so on.

And then, you know, from that is just a cascade of events that ultimately leads to my headaches or my neck pain and so on.

So I think, you know, clearly one cannot talk about, you know, the person, the practitioner being the expert

Having said that, there are times where clearly you need to play the role of the expert.

I don't think we need to simply just rely on the person, on the patient, because also that's why they're consulting us.

If they also notice there is sometimes a little bit of uncertainty about what you think is going on.

This thing about, it's a beautiful thing about clinical practice, about clinical uncertainty.

but humans hate uncertainty anyway our brains don't like uncertainty anyway so we you want to know come on stop stop talking about could be x y and z and just tell me what's going on because in the cases of complexity that's what tends to generate that

that sort of vicious circle where the guy goes to Dr. Google, then goes to the next practitioner, and you end up with a fascinating situation.

Sometimes a person becomes cognitively immune to any new explanations because, hey, guess what?

I've been talking to a lot of practitioners.

Nobody knows what's wrong with me.

And yes, but you're the expert.

So it is a kind of,

something we need to manage very uh you know very well and and in a clever way and i think that comes from creating the the environment where listening uh observing a lot of what's not said but actually is observed in terms of the body language is critical uh also to know when to

when to chip in and say something, when to sometimes just shut down and let the whole thing, let them talk or let them not say anything and, you know, and treat, for example, say that's part of it.

Regarding the other stuff, and we can carry on with this pretty sure the other guys will have fascinating ideas.

I think that the mental images are part of everything, you know, you're talking about, you know, the

the blind person reading braille and so on.

The early studies looking for some form of plasticity in V1 and so on, even with congenitally blind people, they found that there was an element of kind of possibly imagery.

There's a roadmap.

So I don't think you can dissociate yourself from the images you create when you

When you're navigating the world, when you're interacting with the world, and a very strong kind of prior to what we're going to, you know, I put my hand, but then, of course, that prior is going to bias the incoming signal and it's going to match somehow.

Yes, yes, of course, this is what it is.

So images are there.

I think we just need to cope with that.


SPEAKER_02:
What I can add to what just George said is that when observing someone in the clinical practice, actually, the one element might be to start understanding the generative models.

So understanding the generative model means that, in addition to what George said, also how, for example, the body reacts to specific stimuli.

So also testing in the clinical practice the generative model might also give us the idea on how the body might react

from different stimuli to, for example, combining different senses.

So talking about, for example, the pain might change the generative models in the body, for example.

So are some parts getting tighter or more relaxed?

what happened or, for example, touching in specific areas or moving the body in a specific way, how those generative models might change.

And I think it's important in the role play that the patient and the practitioner are

are establishing during the therapeutic alliance.

And I think, and we discussed that also with George, then the right balance between giving this role to the patient and to the practitioners, also it's important for establishing a good therapeutic alliance.

Why is that?

Because actually the patient, as mentioned by Zoe, in a way needs trust.

And trust might be also applied bidirectionally.

So in the way that actually the patient coming into our clinical practice, actually they are just giving us trust.

So they, by default, saying, okay, I'm coming to you because I trust you and because I think you can help me.

So that is a way of sharing trust.

But on the other side, the clinician needs also to trust the patient about what he or she said or what he or she shared.

And in this kind of dichotomous role play, I think it's important the fact that we need to understand and improve our ability of

taking turns, and from that, obviously creating the right environment.

On the other question, so the Braille, yes, mental images are always there, but also mental images are not just visual, because actually they can, during the secondary and third, I mean, in the evolution of the sensations and the feelings,

actually are not just compartmentalized into one image.

So the visual part, because actually then are also characterized by other elements that actually comes from experience, but also comes from our expectations.

So what we expect about those mental images.

In addition to that, there is a difference between, just to pick up a very interesting point raised by Ian, that one of the last papers from Carvalho and Damasio published at the end of 2021

actually where they proposed the interoceptive nervous system and not just the interoception as part of the different aspects of the perception.

When actually they proposed that, they also said that when actually we are gonna have the exteroceptive map and interoceptive map within the brain, it actually comes from

from the senses, from external senses, but also from internal senses, the interoception.

After the process of integrating them into the brain, actually then I'm driving two things.

The first one is feelings, and the other one is drives.

So the drives are the elements that actually are creating the substances for creating the four feelings.

So are the main elements that create, therefore, the consciousness of what we are feeling so far.

And then, in addition to that, when actually they are creating those elements that actually go back into the very nice special issue on interoception published on neuroscience,

as always last year, where actually this concept, this model of intercepting model was then modified into the homeostatic model, where we get into account the fact that actually we have

The interoception is creating, therefore, the object of what we are feeling.

And then there is the subject that is the brain that actually are creating a perspective of what is the interoception.

And then there is the final part.

There is the mental imaging of our interocepting condition and, therefore, everything.

or, therefore, everything, so the mental images, might be also checked with the real, what actually is coming from the tissue.

And this model is called model of forecasting, so creating, therefore, the elements between these two ideals, so the prior and the likelihood, just to talk about something from an FEP perspective.

So in creating what is usually called the posterior.

So I think that the mental images from one side, from the brain side, and the braille side, are then checked with something that is the perception of the blind man that actually is touching

the bar with the different spots, and then they are forecasting the two elements in order to create a mental image that is a kind of a rainbow, so with different colors, with different elements inside, in order to understand what is behind the story that he or she is reading.


SPEAKER_01:
awesome again a lot to kind of pick up on but just the way that the expectations play into what is palpated even just at a primary sensory level like anyone might be able to run their finger and detect a bump but then one level of expertise is that integration of well where should the bumps be or what does this mean in this person's clinical trajectory and so

It isn't just the information flowing into the person doing the perceiving.

It's this active palpation and the integration of decades of the person's experience in the clinical setting.

And then the person's experience within that body.

And then this externalized knowledge resource that we have.

call empirical grounding of science and evidence-based medicine.

And then all of that comes together in the focus of the therapeutic alliance and in the clinical setting.

That's like the runtime where all these features intersect and

it's just very interesting how we're seeing a lot of these threads like you you use the the bayesian terminology like the prior it's the expectations and then there's like the observations and then those are updated to form a posterior connecting that kind of quantitative approach to thinking about perception cognition and then even action selection with the intermodal it's like well even if only that to combine the past present and future with multiple

sensations and types of sensations and cognitive features like memory and preference that would be excellent for actin to do and so that um is really clear how it's presented in the paper in here like what active inference is doing in in this um focused setting of that dyadic

initially touch grounded um relationship but then yeah maybe there's another machine involved maybe somebody is using an x-ray scanner or they're using a temperature like a thermometer that just becomes another observation another mirror active inference or adaptive active inference entity in this multi-adic relationship so really interesting


SPEAKER_03:
i think if i can just add one one interesting thing to to the debate is in recent times we've been been observing quite a lot of debate around you know what's what's the value of palpation you know why why bother uh because you know our patient is typically does have that connotation of biomedical kind of approach you know looking for something that is dysfunctional some pathology and so on i think

One important thing is, from this perspective, I think would be important to take into account is palpation still matters, even if it's just as a way of communicating, as a way of reassuring, as a way of actually contributing to

to the development of that therapeutic niche.

So it's not just, it is the sort of palpation not being a one way stream where I kind of look for what's wrong, and I know what's wrong, but actually is a dialogue.

And that dialogue can involve, of course, finding, you know, something that is, you know, not, not good, you know, potentially even pathological to something that actually

You know, that exploration actually feels nice and comforts the patient and so on.

So it is important not just sort of be on a kind of very fundamentalist approach is either one thing or another, but actually try to kind of, you know, sit in the middle and try to observe the two sides and even the tensions between the two sides, you know, biomedically based or more sort of exploratory, more sort of niche construction, more sort of active inference in nature.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I think back to the expertise, I just wanted to add in about, we brought up the concept of a bird song.

And I think that's kind of how I see it as expertise, I would never tell a patient

personally, that they are not the expertise in their pain.

I don't know what they're feeling in and their priors and different things that are going on to make them their pain.

I would always say that my patient is an expert in what they're feeling in their pain, whatever that may mean to them.

I would say that they are the expert in that.

But I think it's a birdsong.

It's a taking here.

It's your sort of adapting what you think.

Yes, often as a practitioner, you're seen as more of the expert or your precision of maybe the physiological side of the condition is...

more precise than what your patient is, they've obviously not 100% certain what's going on, otherwise, maybe they wouldn't be coming.

But I think it's definitely you adapt what you think based on what your patient is feeling and what they say, if you may think one certain thing, and then they might tell you that actually, you know, they did this at the weekend, or

They felt this or this happened before.

And you kind of constantly change and take it.

You adapt your idea a little bit.

You adapt their idea a little bit.

The whole diagnostic process is generally not cut and dry.

I mean, some situations are, but generally speaking, we do not know 100% what is going on.

um in in a clinical space without machines or without sort of more in-depth knowledge we're going based on what we think um in our opinion so i think it is definitely there's no strict hierarchy in terms of you are just the practitioner is just the expert yeah we may be the expert on one aspect of the condition but not necessarily the aspect on

the whole big picture once you take into account all the other things that contribute to their pain.

It's not just a physiological response often.

To be in sort of an overload of aliostasis, you've got to have a lot more than just pain.

pain there's a reason why behind it there's a certain few things that probably have gone on for them to be in that situation so I think it's it's too simple to say that that you're just the expert because

you've done a degree and you're meant to know sort of the biomechanics or the physiology behind a certain condition.

As for what everyone was saying after towards the Braille and feeling, touch is, there's a lot of research to show that touch is interceptive.

It affects the, and activates the insular system.

which gives you sort of that connection between what you're feeling, what sensory stimulus you're detecting and the feeling that you contribute to that.

So that's why sometimes we have a touch and we feel it's pleasant.

It's that effect of the insula and how it is processed.

And I think that's obviously dependent on the individual.

Different people will have different things that will make certain things feel more pleasant or more painful, depending on...

lots of different aspects and so I think we touched upon sort of touch as a way of a good way of non-verbal communication of expressing not just examining the condition but also showing that you understand through sort of empathy and things like that so

You can use touch to show what you're feeling without saying it.

I think this is something that is very evident with the pandemic.

I mean, there's a lot of people that went through a lot of hard times and the one thing they wanted to do out of everything was just give back.

the person they loved a hug or, you know, they, people missed funerals and weddings and lots of different sort of events, significant events in other people's lives.

And all people wanted to do was just, you know, hug the person if they just lost someone.

So I think touch has a way of communicating with people on a different level than not just sort of the purely clinical level.


SPEAKER_01:
of them, Ian, and then I'll add something.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

And yeah, just following on from what Zoe said, it reminded me, Daniel, of the example you took from the very beginning of the new active inference manual of, you know, putting your finger on your thigh and saying, is this rough or smooth?

And you have to kind of

you have to move your hand to tell if it's rough or smooth.

And then I'm thinking about animals preening themselves, sorry, preening each other or grooming each other and proposing here from an evolutionary point of view, we've been able, we've found this way of distinguishing between a nice smooth, something smooth and soft,

that's supportive and bonding and pack, like animals building a pack together versus something that's more like a fight or a clash or conflict.

And in the paper you talked about, we're arriving at this sort of insight that we're all identical, I think it was, or very similar.

So that brings me back to,

something like safety and alikeness and not reject the role of touch in feeling part of a pack or a tribe versus being rejected or outcast or fought away.

So yeah, that role of touch in reassuring that everything's okay, we are similar.

the other thing what uh um francesco's left but he talked about the understanding the generative model and as he was talking about that i was thinking about i don't know if anyone's um come across something called hakomi it's a form of group but can be done group or individual work where a bit like somatic experiencing where the participants

try and understand in a sort of reflective listening what's going on inside each other.

So try and explore each other's interceptive world, plus also what might be going on in their outside life.

And I remember hearing about performing little experiments.

So the person who takes on the role of the expert kind of says, okay, let's do a little experiment here.

What happens if, you know, what happens if you,

say this or do this or take this action what does that do to your your experience and you know i think that's kind of what happens anyway in therapy you know physiotherapists will give people a list of exercises and say you know do this experiment and hope i i hope that you'll get better um but i'm just wondering with this sort of paradigm shift of uh

physiotherapist just being the expert and prescribing something that's definitely going to work it's more framed as okay you know i'd like to encourage the patient to be more experimental um rather than just be prescribed something

whilst appreciating what you said, George, about, you know, they actually come wanting their hope to be guided in a certain way.

So, you know, we need to have a certain level of confidence and guiding, but not necessarily being too prescriptive.


SPEAKER_03:
Now, the thing about, you know, the generative model and how we can change things.

So, for example, you know, there's two...

two sides of the same equation i would say uh one is when you for example in patients with um kinesiophobia fear of movements when you ask them you know for example you know can you perform this kind of action typically for low back pain most people are scared of bending forward going to flexion because it's typically associated that's how my disc is going to pop and that's how you know i ended up in this situation and so on so uh

you know, putting in, you know, perceiving a little bit of that, of that generative model, which could be one of, you know, moving forward, going into flexion equals pain.

You sometimes just by telling, okay, let's try to do this movement.

And before the patient actually starts doing the movement, you find straight away an immediate muscle guarding, you know, is a sort of, oh yeah, you know, I'll come to that.

That's, that's hurting straight away.

And,

in fact you find sometimes that muscle guarding so you know where does palpation actually come into the equation you know rather than being diagnostic you can actually also look at you know what's going on you know so to try to align our mental states with them and predict what's probably going on going on now from an active inference perspective you could argue that if they believe the morph data the priors is very strong that flexion equals spine it's likely that kind of a minimal

minimal sensory input is likely to create that muscle spasm and therefore yes i knew i would do this and it would be in pain okay so that's what sometimes we we observe and actually if you start thinking about some of the

some of the clinical signs and symptoms you find with patients with persistent pain for example and people you know either catastrophization or you know the phobia and actually putting through this perspective you can argue that you know what's probably likely to be very strong is a generative model sometimes of movement or this type of action equals damage therefore

i have more pain how can we short circuit the whole thing how can we start changing a little bit of that generative model so in a sense creating a prediction error that is so great it actually surprises that

the system.

So, for example, one could use, for example, breathing or focusing on some interoceptive sensations.

That's been used by other practitioners.

For example, in musculoskeletal care, the concept of cognitive functional

you know, therapy is based a little bit on that.

For example, using breathing, asking the patient to sort of focus a little bit on your breathing, take a deep breath in, relax, and now try to move the movement again.

And you find that sometimes, you know, there is an improvement on a few ranges, you know, degrees of range of motion.

but arguably if you think from this perspective actually you started changing the model say oh patient sometimes looks at you so oh that actually feels a little bit easier how come what have you done you didn't do anything you started sort of uh you created this you know surprise the system okay

And you surprise the system in a very positive way, which is, yeah, you know, that's great, you know.

We explore this on the paper that should be out very, very soon, which is try to understand actually how can we generate in a change generative model with guided touch, for example, creating conditions where

One could say, okay, let's focus on, you know, let's focus on the sensations.

Let's focus, okay, you know, this feels quite tight and actually what I'm doing here, I'm releasing the fascia and so on.

Okay, so you can use that if you think the patient is actually, is a suitable candidate for that.

You know, you're not actually implanting another generative model.

There's something wrong with the structure.

Okay, that could help.

But for example, if the patient gives too much attention to that, to those sort of sensations,

then, you know, it's probably wrong to get them to focus on those sensations.

So, because actually you're just perpetuating a little bit of that, you know, belief that prior that actually, okay, it's tight.

Yeah, I'm worried about this and so on.

So, for example, we propose these things coming from kind of a traditional sort of meditation, Buddhist practices in, you know, that's,

example you can short circuit the whole thing by for example start talking about something else which we talked about flattening the sensory states okay so imagine that you know you're palpating you're doing your technique and so on and suddenly you feel like the patient is giving too much attention to that actually there's a sort of failure of sensory attenuation if you want to use in all the jargon here but if you if you then suddenly talk about oh yeah you know what i've got a new dog i was like where does the new dog come from okay

Or if you think that they love football, for example, and their team won last night, they say, oh, I watched the match last night.

It was great, wasn't it?

So that takes the attention away from that and actually kind of maybe enables you to start changing something.

So it's a combination of clearly hands-on stuff where you cleverly can introduce the language

to start surprising the system, start changing a little bit of that generative model.

So I think that's okay.

It's, you know, colleagues in the UK,

have developed this osteo map approach, osteopathy mindfulness and based approach also based on third wave cognitive behavioral therapy and actually uses the similar thing which is you know you're treating but you're sort of talking you try to guide sometimes guide the patient say how does this feel what's what's going on here you know why are you protecting and so on so you start exploring this

So that could work really well, arguably, in a person that is interceptively able to explore that if they're not interceptively prepared.

So, for example, switching, you know, giving too much attention to what's going on inside for some people makes them even more anxious.

So there's no point in saying, yeah, let's mentalize interception because, you know, that's going to be great for everything.

No, it's not.

Actually, you know, I feel like a rumble in my tummy.

It could be something going on, really, isn't it?

Oh, you know, what about if there's a pathology?

I just consulted with Dr. Google.

He told me about this stuff.

So for some people, that's clearly a no-go zone.

For other people, yes, you know, we can explore that.

So, again, if you think through this lens, I think that there's a lot of –

You know, I think one can argue you can have a lot of fun in clinical practice by exploring things rather than limiting yourself to a very rigid sort of boxed approach.

And sometimes you get a patient to, you know, they get up from bed, from the, you know, from the plant and say, oh, actually feels a little bit better, you know.

Actually, it's painful, but it's not as painful.

So arguably you started changing something already.

And that's where sometimes, okay, is it the sort of expectations?

Is it a placebo phenomena?

It is what it is.

You know, you created all the conditions, you put everything together, and actually you created a package of care that arguably can start changing things.

And for me, when a patient says it actually feels a bit easier, it's kind of, okay, that's good stuff.

You know, it's not the result of my technique, it's sort of whatever happened in this setting here.

there is you know they started the road you know their journey in the road to to recovery and that's pretty good and then you you've got you know if you ask the patient sometimes after a few sessions how do you feel today and i feel better i feel much better how's your pain now on the visual analog scale the pen could be

not different from last time or even this is the first session they may have started with a you know six or seven or eight or eight out of ten and at this stage are on a six out of ten for example so clinically there's not a meaningful change anyway but they may actually say i feel much better what does that mean you know feeling much better is yes you know it's the the interceptive stuff it's about you know i i started kind of taking you know i started changing something so

there is i think stuff to play with that combined clearly not just hands-on but the whole kind of you know creating a package a multi-sensory um let's say experience as well awesome i i'd like to yeah sorry please um just to follow up on what uh george said um


SPEAKER_05:
Just from the last bit, and then I'll track back to another point.

But I think it doesn't really matter sort of how you do it, whether you try and shift their attention away from it by talking about something else, whether you shift it away from...

using breathing or trying to approach the way in a different way, you're basically trying to shift the attention away from what if they, especially if they have chronic pain is an overly sort of precise maladaptive belief.

I mean,

It's just trying to get them to kind of step back a little bit from the prior that maybe or the feeling that they have predicted that they're going to feel.

So if they, like George said, bend forwards is painful.

If you get them to step back a little bit from that, whether you do that through...

talking or sort of focusing on your breath through mindfulness you want to shift it back to the the current what they're feeling rather than what they think that they're about to feel um so you can

do that in many different ways, but yeah, just definitely to try and focus away from it.

I think it's, you either kind of go down that path and shift the attention away to kind of then try to refocus, or you kind of use touch as what we've done in the paper to try and develop new associations or to reframe or to overwrite the prior beliefs that maybe aren't quite working for that situation.

Yeah.

to try and hope that by reducing and rewriting it, by doing those exercises, maybe to try and get them to do something that they fear.

They think if they bend forwards, because when they hurt their back, they were bending forwards to pick something up from the floor, and that was painful.

So now they're absolutely terrified that if they bend forwards, that's going to happen, or their dad...

sort of blew their disc when they were bending forwards to lift something, that sort of prior belief.

We just want to try to make the opportunity often through touch or by doing an exercise and giving that sort of feedback that actually, yeah, you're bending forwards, but actually it's not that tight.

And to try to inhibit that prior belief that they've got about expecting the pain and try to reduce the weighting that they've put on it.

So maybe think, oh, well, and even if you can't,

change it so that they stop believing that every time they bend forwards, it's going to be painful, even if you can try and reframe it to context specific priors.

So say like, well, if you bend forwards in this way, then it's okay.

You might not change the fact that they still think that bending forwards is risky.

That's

they might be cognitively immune to changing that completely.

But you might be able to, through touch and through sort of encouraging them, to develop the prior for that context.

So if you...

you know, bend forwards with this posture or this way, or that, that you can, you can update it and change it.

So they think, okay, well maybe actually in that situation, it's okay.

This brings us back to, they did a study with little kids about with,

one that was slightly younger one that was a bunch that was slightly older on balance and they gave the younger kids thought that balance was just sort of gravity so things balanced because they had gravity working upon it whereas the older kids thought that it wasn't that simple and that if the object was weighted more on one side then obviously even if it was gravity pulling it down they'd tilt

And so there was two different theories of how balance works.

And they kind of, the investigators gave the kids the other one.

So all the ones that thought it was just plain gravity were introduced to the concept from the other ones and vice versa.

And they explained these concepts and then they showed them the block, which they'd kind of used to say like, look, this is the block, this is how it balances, this is your theory.

And then they said, well, do you want to play?

And almost every single one took the block, tried out the other theory of how it balanced.

And then after sort of 10 minutes of play, they asked them what they thought again.

And some of them changed their minds and they used that sort of tactile sort of learning and touch to update what they thought about their theory of balance.

And then to...

change and adapt slightly of what they thought some didn't change it completely some did but they all wanted to touch and explore to give them the opportunity to sort of understand that prior and to build up um a new belief of what maybe they thought was going on so i think we do that a lot in clinics um

Look, you can move further now, or it doesn't feel so tight, or that knot that you said you had doesn't feel as hard, things like that.

And back to the comment about how we relied on others, I think it was.

Yes, and working together, the hunter-gatherer thing.

I think it's important to note that we're...

We're built to work together.

I mean, we haven't got a choice.

We might when we're sort of old enough to go hunt for deer and boar and things like that.

But when we're first born, we need the touch of our mother or a caregiver of some sort to get to get our allostatic needs.

We cannot survive without them.

If you leave a baby on its own.

that they probably won't survive on their own they need the mom or the the person to to pick them up to feed them to regulate their body temperature to to do everything they they don't have a choice and even before that um neonatally you're constantly as a fetus being bombarded with different information from your your mom and we touched upon this in the um

The paper.

You need... They constantly know what their mom is feeling.

And so, of course, once they're born, they still want to coordinate with their mom because that's what they've been used to for nine months as they start to develop and start to feel touch in different areas.

And, you know, they start to get nerves.

They want to explore and see what happens.

So...

yeah we inherently need to rely on others at some point and while we get older it's not as continuous and we only rely on others maybe when we don't know what to do um then then we will it's not so like i'm not gonna relate to my caregiver now i know what my heart rate should be i know what's normal for me and that's different but when you're younger you don't have a choice and so

and as you can't speak touch is is the first point of communication so yeah i think i touched on most of the points that were mentioned earlier awesome


SPEAKER_01:
I wanted to bring a few active inference points in and loop it in and then ask a great question in the chat.

So we've been talking a lot about the generative model.

And so the generative model is a statistical model that includes all these features we've been describing like perception, cognitive variables and action selection.

And also it integrates this Bayesian idea of the prior and the updates and the posterior.

So we talked earlier about how the practitioner is engaging in these informative perturbations and experiments of the patient's generative model.

And those perturbations can be seen as action selection that are informative by the generative model of the practitioner.

So in the therapeutic alliance, in the niche of that clinic, there's like multiple generative models that are engaging with each other.

And so that's a setting that active inference has been used to study and to connect that back to the bird song.

This is just, it's such a fascinating avenue of research.

that I think it's worth going one level into how the birdsong plays out.

So we talked about the conversation and about how the patient has one type of experience and expertise in their own embodiment.

And then the clinician has another type of expertise in their education and also in their embodiment and where that comes together is through touch.

So in the birdsong example, there's this expected birdsong.

We can think of it as like the stereotypical or the archetypal bird song that the birds are expecting to hear.

Like if you're listening to a song that you know, you're expecting it to be playing out a certain way.

Now, why doesn't one bird just sing and then the other one is hearing what it expects to hear

So it never takes a turn.

And so in other words, like why the equivalent in the clinical setting would be like the expert clinician could just be speaking from their expertise and just giving a one hour lecture on a condition.

Or you could have a situation with a one hour lecture the other direction with just the person sharing for one hour.

So how do we move from that like one directional perspective?

um non-turn taking which still could be absolutely expertise on either side but there's this like emergent joint expertise when there's a conversation so how does active inference model that turn taking and

perhaps not the only way that this could be modeled, but how it is modeled in the birdsong papers of Friston and Frith, is that action selection requires a transient suppression of precision on action selection.

So in other words, if I'm seated right now and I want to engage in standing up,

There has to be a transient suppression of precision, like an openness around what am I doing?

Because if my confident belief is I am sitting down, then engaging the counterfactual, I could stand up, will never be enacted because I have a high precision belief that it's simply not the case.

And in fact, they've connected that to various movement disorders where there's challenges in initiating or challenges in terminating movements.

behavior and so what's happening with the turn-taking birds is that one bird is singing and so it's singing from the song book so to speak the expected song but its continued engagement in singing is accompanied by this increasing reduction in precision around what it is doing it's kind of like someone going on a rant and there's like they're actually losing precision they're losing the thread as the rant continues

as a function of them suppressing accuracy because they have to engage in action and then at some point that elicits that acting entity to seize action and to increase its its precision through listening through active listening and so that is how the birds take turns in this bird song even though they're singing from the same sheet they do take turns because they're engaged in like a transient suppression of precision on action that allows them to act then that

imprecision around action becomes too much and then they need to recover that precision through listening again so it's quite an interesting thing and it just reminded me of like well there's a dialogue it doesn't have to be equal time it doesn't even have to be speaking all the time but there has to be this emergent dialogue

otherwise it would just be a one-way phone call with the download on the clinical side or the download on the person's experience so i hope that that these kinds of formal models like the bird songs the toy model but seeing that kind of a generative model play out

in the context of the skilled uh performance and experimentation this might sound weird but you know why don't you try doing this and then the patient brings up something unconventional or they discover something new about their body and that is where like healing and and openness can occur so that was like awesome threads and then i want to ask the question in the chat for for everybody it would be great to hear their responses so glia maximalist in the chat has asked

How can patients learn to think about pain in order to update their generative model?

Or is this something that is possible to do subconsciously with the assistance of the treatment?

So what are the explicit cognitive and implicit cognitive aspects of updating generative models around pain?

Yeah, George, then Ian, then Zoe.


SPEAKER_03:
I think it starts with education about pain, you know, what is pain and why people have that experience and clearly having, you know, two sort of situations where in acute pain, pain being kind of regarded typically as a useful protective mechanism.

If you just hurt yourself,

you know, if you twist your ankle and you're in pain and there's a minor tissue problem and that needs time to heal and so on.

So clearly there is pain and people need to understand that, you know, you're in pain because this happened and it's protection and should go away and so on.

The challenge is much more complex when we face chronic pain because, you know, in those cases and a lot of times the protection

and no longer needs to be there why is is protecting from from what you know there's not necessarily a need to to protect but the system becomes pretty good that's you know it's almost like generating that stuff and people continue having sometimes a presentation that is you know limping or or a particular muscle spasm in movement and so on i think it's about sort of

starting with with understand you know getting the person to understand the nature of what's what pain is about without giving them a lecture on the neuroscience of pain because you know that that's clearly does not work as well so it needs to be something that is simple straightforward so it starts with that it needs to be um you know a reasonably well explained um kind of framework um you uh i think you know what are you talking about the bird song and so on it's kind of you know

interesting thing about, you know, sensory attenuation, which in the context of chronic pain, and we argue that on the other paper on active osteopathic care is inactive inference, that probably in some cases of chronic pain is actually a failure of this attention.

So disengaging from that constant attention to the problem.

How do you achieve that?

Yeah, again,

communication, touching, talking or not talking and taking turns.

And the analogy to the bird song is clearly, you know, it's a fascinating thing.

It's clearly what we try to reach, you know, that synchrony between two or more individuals in that clinical setting when things start kind of working well and, you know, it's leading to somewhere.

So just some thoughts.

So Ian.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Yes, I agree with that.

That needs to be kind of simple and understandable explanation, but challenging the perhaps previous views.

I'm just sort of reminded of...

specifically for the person who asked this question, the work of Yoni Ashar and Tor Wagner's pain reprocessing therapy study is a bolder study, but it's been,

converted into a book called The Way Out on chronic pain and an app called Curable.

So for people who are watching this live stream, there are some simple things to check out.

And The Way Out is published by Penguin.

And the elements of how they suggest to people

self you know self care for chronic pain are two things so one is they call it somatic tracking which is basically an interoceptive exercise where you with curiosity and lightness and openness sort of um explore the pain and um secondly is to build evidence of safety so to actually literally write lists of you know right now i'm experiencing um

evidence that my body, I'm safe in my body, for whatever reason it might be, because, you know, just I'm here sitting and breathing, that means I'm relatively safe.

So those two things, exploring the pain in a different way, and building evidence of safety.

So that's, you know, I think that's a quite nice starting point.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Zoe, anything you would add there?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, sorry.

Yeah, I think definitely, as George said, trying to keep it simple is essential.

If I start talking to my patient about the ACC and how it changes this part of the brain and it works on this bit, I think I'd lose them within five seconds.

Most patients, while they're not so interested in all the neuroscience behind it, if you try to speak to them, I think it depends on the patient.

how best to sort of make their pain kind of realized.

I think most patients find it difficult to say what their pain is.

Sometimes they can't describe what they're feeling.

They don't know the words to kind of say, which is why sort of I think touch is also useful in this aspect because you might be able to try and show someone something without actually having to say it.

and definitely as George said in chronic pain it's again not so simple people can be cognitively immune no matter how much you try to explain it they might just not want to sort of update or to to hear it so yeah I think it depends on their priors their situation and how best you think that you can kind of get that across whatever way you think might be more amenable to them

I'll pass it back to Ian.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Yeah, Ian.

Thanks.

Just picking up on what George and Zoe have said about, you know, different sub subcategories of patients who might be more or less open to different tools that can be offered to them.

So, as you said, you know, someone who's suffering from a certain type of anxiety might be immune to bringing more attention to their interoceptive sensorium, whereas patients

you know, that might be accessible to someone who's cognitively immune to the conceptual idea.

They might actually enjoy that.

So I'm thinking for future research, how can we find markers or indicators for these different subcategories of people that can be picked up really early?

So, you know, a therapist can say, work their way through a flow diagram.

When I'm doing my, taking my history, case history for this patient, they, you know, as I'm talking to them,

they seem you know, they they're, they're showing signs of being open to this thing, but not that thing.

And then you can work your way through and end up with, okay, I'm going to use this, I'm going to try this tool first as the first test.

And then if that doesn't work, then I try, try that.

So you know, getting some big studies with big N numbers that that try to identify these dips, different subcategories of clinical indicators.

That's awesome.

Thanks, Zoe.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I haven't read massively big studies, but one thing to consider that you can get from the case history is the family, especially if you're treating kids.

The research that's come out more recently on the parents' priors, they took a study looking at kids in a rheumatological clinic.

93% of their parents had pain

had some sort of pain.

They showed that if the parents reported pain when they were doing exercise, the kids were more likely to have higher pain levels.

to report more problems, not just in general health issues, not just with that, but also things like they didn't want to do the homework.

So even more general things were affected by sort of the way that their parents thought they were more likely to catastrophize.

That was one massive thing that if their parents had experienced more pain, then the kids' risk of catastrophization was significantly more and almost that you could predict the amount that they would from that.

Same with studies...

with oxytocin.

The parents oxytocin from 10 minutes play with their kid then meant that you could empirically predict how much oxytocin the kid would increase.

So I think some things like that you can pick up from the case history if you know people or they're willing to let you know about what might be going on previously.

Some patients won't want to talk about it, but some you might be able to get from if there's more than one of them in it or something like that.

That's one indicator now of what, you know, if they come in and someone else or they've said something about a belief that someone else has had, it might be harder to kind of change that.

like why are you more of an expert than their parent or whoever had said it so I think that's there's one way that they're starting to kind of pick up that you could easily implement into your case history or you might already be asking about that you just didn't realize the significance of it you knew it was significant but not the extent that we're now sort of starting to realize.


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm.

Yes.

Very interesting.

Of course, we're just exploring like different avenues, but in, and it's not my area as only an ant doctor, but whether somebody uses thinking or feeling type words or refers to their own direct experience versus the experience of somebody who they trust versus information they received from a search engine, those are all cues that

maybe that is what then the clinical decision-making pivots towards, or maybe it's a cue that other areas in that cognitive space would be informative to explore.

Like if somebody spends 10 sentences talking about what they received from their body,

you could ask if you've asked anyone else or what did you look at when you researched it?

If somebody says 10 things about just what they researched, maybe how does that reflect with your own experience?

Like just to kind of even the score and sample across different regions of this space, then that could potentially help give a coherent and holistic perspective, which is kind of implicit in a lot of

the discussions that all of you are bringing here.

So Ian,


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, all really good suggestions there.

And Zoe, as you were talking, I was thinking about, I've heard sort of similar studies with parents with digestive problems and children with digestive problems.

But then it got me thinking about intergenerational trauma and DNA methylation and epigenetics and

And whether there, you know, this is not necessarily within our scope immediately, but longer term, are there any DNA screen, methylation screen patterns that can be used to see if someone might be more or less open to different interventions?


SPEAKER_01:
Interesting note there.

And these cognitive approaches, it's a compliment to understanding the correlation between the rheumatological outcomes of the parents and the children.

Like one possible aspect is there's a predisposition.

carried through the DNA sequence, carried through an epigenomic modification, carried through a shared and cultured niche, a shared way of expecting things like those may come differently into play in the N equals one.

that is the therapeutic alliance that's assembling around this person who is having this experience.

And so that is kind of like what breaks through the large N and just presents us very plainly and starkly with this one person's experience.

And there isn't going to be a large study with that person because nobody will ever replicate one or two or five of those aspects.

So that's like where the...


SPEAKER_03:
large and the small n and sort of a top-down and a bottom-up approach to these topics hits hits the the compromise um george um yeah that would be fascinating to try to see if people are more predisposed to respond to some forms of of therapy and or not now interesting thing you know we we've done uh several studies in you know in uh in neonatology uh with preterm babies and we found that

osteopathic care seemed to reduce, well, was effective in reducing the length of stay in hospital.

We tested also the hypothesis comparing, you know, static touch with a form of dynamic affective touch.

We saw that, you know, there is a role in modulating the, you know, reducing arousal from an autonomic perspective.

It seems to, you know, babies respond to that.

And one could argue that actually

The priors there aren't great yet because they're responding to that contact.

We also know that kangaroo care is an effective evidence-based approach for preterm, so skin-to-skin contact with parents.

This stuff seems, you know, again, plays, you know, suggests that touch seems to play an important role.

It would be good, and we try to do that, to look at, for example, the babies that received that hands-on intervention, to follow them for a number of years into perspective study and actually see what happened, you know, in terms of cognitive events, you know, and general sort of development.

This...

But then, you know, if we start thinking about, okay, yeah, it's okay, the babies are sort of not, don't know really how to respond.

Then there are some interesting ideas being developed, in particular with people like Anna Cianucca, looking at in utero being the first prior, in fact.

And if you look at in some cultures, mothers touch their belly and sort of interact, start interacting with the baby very early on.

So actually, arguably, those babies already starting being touched and they're sort of primed to,

probably respond in a better, in a more positive way to tactile kind of stimulation.

There's also research started talking about, for example, in the case of twins, they start touching each other around sort of week 12, week 20 or so.

So again, there's a form of, you know, tactile contact stimulation.

uh other you know other authors for example katarina fotopolo talks about and actually the first prior is actually the mother for example so again goes to the idea that actually either through um you know prior to one being born the sort of that interaction with the mother creates that prior so likely

you know, creates a predisposition perhaps to the sort of good response to a more manual type of intervention.

So, you know, the fascinating things can be explored.

Of course, you know, always have, you know, from a negative perspective, sometimes in randomized controlled trials, people say, yeah, but, you know, those guys kind of, you know, it was good outcome because those were good responders to treatment.

anyway but again what does being a good responder to a manual type of intervention actually means you know the variables are such you know so many that it actually um you know kind of the scope is huge so one one could explore but actually there are some serious questions in in in the whole thing for sure thank you zoe and then we'll have kind of a closing thoughts as we finish the dot one


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I think just to go off what George said, they've shown in neonates as well that basically as soon as an area of the body starts to get any sort of nerve innervation at all, the fetus will start to touch that area.

So when they start to get the face, which is often one of the first, that's why you see a lot on ultrasounds, baby touching areas.

their faces or their hands or things.

As soon as they get innovation to their area, they're touching it to explore, to see what is this that they can now feel.

So I think definitely touch is one of the first things that

people will use to develop a prior or to just understand what is going on in sort of the world that is is around them um to expand upon what george said the long term they did do one study about the long-term effects of uh kangaroo care incubator and full-term

babies and they found that while this was more towards the the synchrony with the the parent but when they were initially it was the the full-time ones that didn't need any help had the sort of strongest synchrony the strongest sort of

Sorry, it's almost midnight here.

And then the skin-to-skin contact was sort of next, and then the incubator was after.

This was initially when they were doing it.

But when they followed up on these same kids when they were adults, they found that actually the synchrony between them when they were adults to their parents was the same.

So the ones that got the skin-to-skin contact had the same as the full-tone ones.

So it had developed over their whole life.

That continuous effect of touch built up so that they were on par, whereas before they were lower down.

So it's not something that's just developed naturally.

Um, in those sort of critical period where things are developing more, it is something that, you know, the effects that had happened when you were one, two, three, um, to building up when you were 12 to 18 still have an effect when you're not, I mean, there's areas of the brain that don't stop developing fully until you're 26.

So, you know, that's a lot of experiences that you're going to have from different parts until that age.

They're all going to contribute to it.

So it's not sort of just the first prize.

Then they've shown that those prizes, especially with touch, are still evident in adults.

Just because they had it as a baby.


SPEAKER_01:
It's another value for integrative models.

We can have continuity between the nutrients delivery in utero, and then the neonate with the spoon coming in, airplane making the landing, and then adults who have a little bit more agency maybe in their peripersonal space with the spoon and landing the airplane, but there's the supply chain.

So it's just another part of an extended nutrient cycling system.

are we going to have custom narrow theories for each one of these settings and or will we have some layers and interoperability between these different settings that help us like transpose useful models and find areas of contact those are all really important um areas for lifelong learning like you brought up and there's areas of the brain that

continue after you're 26 people still learn things and so that's brain development too um i just wanted to look at figure one and or figure two and just in kind of our closing thoughts what is uh one of figure one and figure two both have like a really creative and um delightful style

So figure one is focusing on different functions that are discussed in the paper and in relationship to empirical evidence around different brain regions.

And figure two is kind of pulling out one level

looking at different functions that are arising in here the dyad so maybe if each person whether figure one or figure two what's like one area that you're excited to talk about in dot two or one thing that you think um like really stood out to you as something that was a contribution that you weren't seeing in other work or in other ways of representing these topics

So maybe Ian first, and then we'll hear from the authors.

But anything from figure one or figure two that would be exciting to explore more.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Daniel.

What stands out for me today is the two monkeys doing a

one-handed handstand with a joyful look on their face.

So this idea of cooperative communication and that, to me today, that speaks to this idea of, you know, neither of them look like they're an expert.

They look like they're playing together, which is a nice approach to think of in the therapeutic alliance.

Not always possible to be playful, but, you know, when possible,

Can we be like the monkeys?

But then moving on, I'd like to explore maybe this idea of arriving at the realization that we're similar or identical.

So again, those monkeys look pretty identical, but what does that mean?

I'd like to hear from the authors about that.

And then maybe next time we're exploring this idea of

when the generative models or the allostatic regulation, the set points start to drift.

And that, you know, I'm thinking more broadly in our society, our health, global health problems are, are they a drifting of our allostatic set points around food production and what healthy food actually means and how it's, how that's aeroplane coming into the mouth, you know?

So some expert model has told us that certain foods should be what we eat, but the health indicators suggest that that model may not be the best model.

And how do we, as therapists who are open to this active inference model, kind of keep that possibility of drifting, this model drifting, and how do we decide what the set point should be?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah from the from the airplane landing the spoon to literally the airplane landing with the food we never grow up okay figure one or figure two george um i have no


SPEAKER_03:
I don't think I have much more to add.

You know, the figure one, of course, you know, it's a sort of an overview really where potentially, so this is sort of putative effects of touch at all different levels.

Yeah, you know, one thing I'm quite keen, actually, that thing about the two monkeys playing and kind of communicating and so on, is that although we, you know, we have a strong bias in the paper towards a sort of more neuroscience kind of biased model, that it is critical that we don't turn the whole thing into a neurocentric model, because ultimately, if you complain too much about biomedical model, and then kind of pain management became

brain centric, neuro centric model kind of, you know, nothing really changes, does it?

You know, it's a sort of still, you know, depending on an expert that tells tells you exactly what to do.

So, yeah, that's I like, you know, the figure two kind of gives us more a little bit of an ability to look at the whole kind of process where we did that process.

And again,

I'm quite aware of, you know, criticisms that, you know, this paper may also attract from, yeah, you know, these guys just basically pontificating around touch is the most important thing and so on.

And I clearly I'm not on that level.

I'm clearly arguing for.

No, no, it's not that.

It's an important tool.

It's an important vehicle.

But ultimately, it's about communication, in my opinion.

It's about, for me, you know, what I'm trying to kind of get into that niche, that bird song, yeah?

Getting that biobehavioral synchrony going.

And I think, you know, when you're getting there, then things, you know, can, you know, some very interesting things can happen.

And, you know, I...

know we can explore this that's uh 2.0 next time and even uh some ideas about some of the techniques that potentially people kind of make big arguments and people are super critical about you know for example more cranial sacral or cranial based type of stuff that it doesn't work that way but you know one could argue that

maybe the phenomena that we observe is actually a phenomenon of synchronies, is the birdsong, and that enables us to get some very interesting things going.

So I'm thinking a lot, I'm kind of exploring through, but I think for me that's, so figure two, clearly the other one is sort of, you know, we don't treat the brain, we treat the person.

There's a person lives in that body.

rather than treating bodies you know we're not you know don't think we should sort of be at that level you know it's body work you know it's not body work is you know it's it's a different story you know it's really it's about the person more than the body the body tells us a story body can be a mark of a blanket body can be many things but body it provides a landscape sensory landscape an opportunity to get into kind of influence and so on but

Hey, that's it.

What about the person lives there?

That's for me the fascinating bit.

And sometimes the thing you change minor things in their generative model and the whole thing starts getting better.

You surprise yourself.

So that's placebo.

Yeah, whatever it is.

But I think that can potentially be the beauty of it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

From kind of a body work.

cadaver materialism physicalism to embodied work with the richness of the situation that that's the map and the territory and very interesting and the uh last word for the first author


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, so I think both the figures... I think figure one, when I was sort of sketching out what I sort of wanted to do for it, I did, again, sort of go with... From what George said, it's not... Yes, it's neurocentric in terms of it's labelled based on the areas of the brain.

But if you think more sort of broadly about it, the...

I mean, it covers a wide range of things.

You have the two monkeys having fun, to the mom holding her baby, to sort of then people being really happy that they won something, to then the heart.

I mean, I think what I like about it is while it shows that touch, yeah, it's a vehicle for change, but it affects a lot of different things.

and it's things that we might not yeah when we're examining someone in clinic we're not thinking like is this you know rewarding or are we making the bird song with the two birds kind of um doing it it's something that we we innately do i don't think we specifically always focus on that all the different effects and i think it's nice to see an overview of

Touch is not so simple.

I think it shows very clearly that touch is not just touch.

It's not just you touch someone, you are affecting lots of different things or can affect lots of different things depending on how you use it.

So it's just one vehicle for change, but it can affect a lot of different things.

I liked...

doing it to show all just how varied it can be and how it can be manipulated for lots of different things.

The second one, again, like George said, it's not so sort of scientific.

It does, I think it,

It shows very well that touch is used through the sort of holding of hands in the middle, but that's not the main thing.

I like how we tried to show the different sort of aspects of each other.

So what the sort of practitioner might be thinking towards what the patient could interpret the same thing as very different.

So you see with like B, they're trying to help and console and C, they're trying to move around.

But then on the other side, you've got like,

gee, where, you know, maybe they think that the practitioner might be like, yeah, thinking, oh, okay, this injury, you know, in a few weeks time, they'll be getting back on their feet, they're getting strengthening, we can start doing rehab.

But really, actually, the other one could be thinking, gee, like, oh, no, I'm going to be stuck in a wheelchair forever.

The same thing, I like how it shows the same thing can be interpreted in many different ways, depending on the priors and everything that we've been talking about.

It's not...

the communication, the way things are interpreted can be interpreted things very differently with the same stimulus.

And I think that's what we try to show, or hopefully we try to show that active inference is a lot more inclusive of lots of different things that might be going on in treatment rather than just one thing that, you know, just get them better.

It's not so simple.

There's a lot of things going on that we've tried to include.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, on the theme of the same stimuli or observation resulting in different implications for different individuals, when I saw the handshake and the symbol in the middle, I thought of the DNA double helix and of like a sort of feeling touched because it's more like a brainwave synchrony.

telepathy situation.

Otherwise, their bodies would have been touching.

So I think that's an awesome conversation.

This was a great addition to the work itself.

And we're really looking forward to 44.2 next week at the same time.

So we'll look forward to seeing everybody then again.

Thank you very much.

See ya.

Thank you.

## epoHxFdzFkw

SPEAKER_01:
Hello and welcome everyone.

It's Academic Lab Livestream number 44.2 and it's May 25th, 2022.

Welcome to the Academic Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for live streams.

If you want to learn more about the live streams or any other projects at Active Inference Lab, check out activeinference.org.

Okay, today in 44.2, we are in our third discussion around the paper, Therapeutic Alliance as Active Inference, The Role of Therapeutic Touch and Synchrony from 2022 by the authors listed here.

And Ian and I had a dot zero where we contextualized and went over some of the outline of the paper.

Then we had a great discussion last week with several of the authors in the dot one.

and today we're here with some of the authors and we'll see who else joins and we'll be continuing that discussion around the paper we left a few threads but also we can just take it wherever people would like to go and we'll begin just by saying hello people can say anything they want and

How is this week different than last week?

How are we approaching this paper differently?

Or what would we like to resolve or address in this dot two that was stimulated by the dot one or that we didn't get to in the dot one?

Feel free to add anything in that area.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California.

And

One piece in the DOT2 that I'd like to explore would be what are the entities that we're discussing here, at what scales, and how to think about that in terms of their generative model, and so on.

And I'll pass to Ian.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello.

Thank you, Daniel.

And yes, I would like to maybe pick up on if we've got time on the topic of synchrony this week and what types of synchrony might we be talking about, what things might be

oscillating that come into sort of phase lock between two agents that have the potential to synchronize.

And then where do they head towards with their synchrony?

And then if we've got time, you know, thinking about tying this all back to some of the core

ideas about minimizing free energy and what what does that mean for for in a therapeutic setting um yes that's it i think thank you awesome all right any of the authors feel free to go for it zoe ladies first


SPEAKER_04:
Okay, so I'm George.

I'm one of the authors on this paper.

I'm an osteopath and researcher.

And where do I see this going forward?

I pretty much enjoyed the interaction we had last week and very happy to kind of be left by you guys, Ian and Daniel, and anybody else that want to join.

I think we can definitely explore those ideas about, you know,

synchronization two agents and arguably more than two agents when we operate in a kind of not in a in a dyadic setting but actually a triadic setting for example uh pediatric care kind of elderly care and so on we're actually there there's a next an additional agent in in in the whole thing so um what do i you know look forward to the discussion um

kind of, you know, stimulate some ideas about, you know, ways in which we can move forward with this to the more empirical state of the research.


SPEAKER_02:
Great.

Zoe?


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, I'm Zoe.

I'm an osteopath as well, based in Singapore, and I'm the primary author for this paper.

um yeah happy to be led by anyone that wants to where we want to go but definitely happy to talk about synchrony i think as george said it would be important to talk about not just dyadic but triadic or otherwise um because i think that adds a lot of um depth to it but also it's easier to sort of discuss the effects of synchrony and also the fact that you can be


SPEAKER_01:
Hey, lost Zoe for a second.


SPEAKER_05:
Anyone that wants to ask questions?


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Also, Zoe, is there like any other microphone to use or could you speak closer to the microphone?


SPEAKER_05:
I'm just using my laptop, so there isn't really a microphone.

I can take my headphones off.

Does that make a difference?


SPEAKER_01:
It's fine.

It's just a little quiet, but it's fine.

But

Okay.

Sorry.

Oh no, it's all, it's totally all good.

Just want us to check.

Okay.

All right.

Let us pick up with the synchrony then.

So I guess just to kind of recall, how was this question of synchrony approached in the active inference literature and maybe even outside of the active inference literature?

And then how was synchrony approached in this paper?

Why was that such a core topic in this approach that the authors took?


SPEAKER_05:
I think we started with synchrony as the main part, mainly because

When we were talking about the therapeutic alliance, synchrony and getting on with the other person is kind of key.

And the way that we approach this paper primarily in terms of a lot of the aspects of how we achieve that good therapeutic alliance was through synchrony.

So that's kind of where we... That's one of the reasons.

Through active inference, it was also...

about we started or I started the research when I was looking at it right from sort of the start and looking at how communication worked and how why people would want to sort of synchronize together and why people to implement active inference into sort of the structure that we had.

it was important to kind of see why that would be beneficial because we wanted to use, or we like to say that the synchrony enables us to work together to then therefore save free energy, be more efficient.

And then that's how we kind of, we very much used it to apply the active influence sort of framework around

around it and so I felt that it was very key without the synchrony element it would be very it was kind of the backbone into which a lot of the aspects of active influence in the way that we achieve therapeutic alliance seem to sort of center around without that connection between different people we wouldn't be we wouldn't be able to be to save energy to work together to

have a better relationship with our practitioners, we wouldn't, with the patients and practitioner, we wouldn't be able to get the clinical applications and benefits from it.

So I saw synchrony as sort of the key modality to sort of get to where the sort of paper was.

So it was sort of a key concept to use in order to implement it all together.


SPEAKER_04:
Let's say when we started the project actually kind of putting some ideas along the lines of how could we apply predictive processing and the free energy active inference within

within osteopathy and within the osteopathic setting.

Synchrony came along actually after the sort of initial discussion with Carl Friston that kind of suggested it's actually, you know, look into this stuff because actually it could be

quite a robust way of understanding what goes on in the clinic room when two people are working together with a specific kind of aim.

There is a little bit of literature in psychotherapy kind of demonstrating that actually therapeutic alliance becomes much more robust when two people synchronize and

both at the kind of um you know behavioral but also more biological level and um and it was nothing about sort of okay you know this is about pure verbal communication non-verbal but primarily by kind of copying body movements and so on um to think okay you know how can this be applied in the context of actually a an approach that is largely hands-on based you know the manual

therapy so that's where it kind of started from it was why one way of um of trying like like zoe said kind of looking at therapeutic alliance when people interact um to try and understand what goes on in the dyadic setting kind of two people but also a little bit beyond that you know it kind of what happens when

There's actually more people involved in that therapeutic relationship that need to be consulted, need to be involved in the process and so on.

So that was the kind of early stage.

And then we thought that actually this is a good way of understanding a little bit more about how we can create the conditions of

developing a strong kind of a ecological niche that is based on that synchrony of that sort of understanding of that give and take like a little bit like we talked about last week the kind of the bird song you know

people taking turns, kind of understanding, listening, okay, acting, kind of taking on, go back and so on.

And that's sort of, in a sense, like a kind of a nice wave that goes back and forth, but it is a kind of very nice and tranquil kind of a wave, not a one that just crashes and destroys everything, but actually one where, you know, one step kind of goes on.

little bit like the pendulum kind of analogy once you introduce that nice pendulum kind of things happen that's where we sort of thought you know it's could be one way of exploring the the whole process of care thank you ian


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

So, yeah, I'm fascinated by the topic of synchrony and the little bits I've read in the literature about how

you know, measurable things that might be able to synchronise between one or two or more people.

So, you know, Daniel, I think we discussed this in the dot zero.

So choirs singing together, they have been shown that their heart rates kind of synchronise with their breathing.

And I think in the paper there was some references cited for similar sort of stuff in drumming circles, for example.

So that really interests me.

And I can kind of begin to see how, in a therapeutic setting, that kind of synchrony could lead someone who's maybe stressed and anxious into a kind of more healthy, increased parasympathetic activity.

And that is conducive to healing.

But I've also got these other sort of nagging things about synchrony as well that maybe I touched on in the, you know, the dot zero, which is what are we synchronizing towards?

And is it always, you know...

uh beneficial so you know this this kind of the less kind of lockstep synchrony that you talked about daniel um so maybe it's just um you know let's say a child saying mummy mummy mummy waving their arms around and then the mum synchronize they synchronize their attention together so you get mother and child and then then you've got a choice so there's some aspect that's synchronized you know that i think in the paper it talks about the

arms and you know, the limbs and the voice kind of synchronizing, but you know, and the facial expressions, but you know, a caregiver might then

lead the child to a soothing kind of parasympathetic way soothe it or it might say you know give it a click behind the ear and say you know children us to be seen and not heard and try and stop the attention you know the attention is synchronized but the the um the action may not be therapeutic so um yeah i'm just sort of thinking about where you know where

just because something's synchronized, does it mean it's always minimizing free energy or just because it's, you know, things in the therapeutic world go in and out of fashion.

So frontal lobotomies, okay, we don't do that anymore.

But that for a while, there was some kind of synchronized thinking in the therapeutic world that that's a good idea for people.

And, you know, there are ideas that I hear

in the wider kind of therapy world that are fashionable but um and they're being applied um but you know they in 50 years time we may look that they may have been leading people away from minimizing free energy or improving health so um yeah and my thoughts okay awesome yeah a lot there george um


SPEAKER_04:
think that the interesting thing you know is they are nagging questions there for sure um the first one do we always synchronize and uh you know when if you don't synchronize what we're gonna do because you know clearly there are cases where we know the therapeutic relationship is going nowhere okay we can say whatever you know we can try our best but actually

There is resistance to change from the patients.

We end up not understanding each other.

And arguably, that's a relationship that will not evolve.

And you might even get to a point at the end, maybe it would be a good idea to go and see a colleague of mine kind of thing.

So do we synchronize with everybody?

No, clearly not.

is there any value understanding this stuff by sometimes understanding that some kind of gestures and sort of body language and so on, voice, sound, sort of communication style, we're probably giving an excuse to maybe to adapt a little bit.

So to try and synchronize a little bit better.

I think that's useful.

I think important.

in order to be a good communicator.

I think first and foremost, you know, sometimes people worry too much about the technical skills and the ability of doing X and Y and doing some miracles and so on.

Arguably, you know, the first thing that people need to be in a clinical setting is a good communicator and a pretty good, nice person, okay?

And I think, you know, if that's there, I think we've got, we create the conditions and good communicators are likely to

to have potentially better outcomes that guys that basically don't care and sort of they're the experts and so on the other question is you know is it always about minimizing free energy because you know there are situations um where probably you know you want to short circuit the whole thing you know you want to sort of flatten a little bit of that sort of sensory states you know you want to create a condition where and the only way you can you can um

you can sort of uh change the generative model is actually by creating a massive surprise a massive prediction error that arguably surprises the system in a way like wow what just happened you know and actually oh okay so it's it's i don't think it's always about minimizing free energy as in that but sometimes i think you know you want to shock the whole thing because the system on the other side wants to minimize free energy for sure

you know, if you mind, if I'm a kind of chronic pain patients, and I, you know, I'm scared of moving, and you tell me to move and so on, the reaction is, you know, I anticipate the likelihood of movement leading to pain, I anticipate the consequences of actions in the future, the typical active inference

model and you know i lock i don't move so i probably want to short circuit the whole thing to create a condition where you know it's actually okay to move because not going to cause any harm

and so is it through synchrony um maybe it isn't okay so i think i i think it's not a sort of i think um a kind of one size fits all kind of thing uh i don't think you know it's just about sort of always that minimizing free energy because i think creating change that is meaningful change uh probably needs a little bit more of it it needs to

needs to destroy that sort of strong prior kind of thing so i can implant another chip kind of thing yeah in a metaphorical way um and that's why we know in in some mental health conditions why some types of drugs like ketamine and so on create that condition you know that you know sort of zeros the whole thing is a bit like you know you reset the button isn't it the computer is stuck what you do

you've tried everything you unplug the computer and then you try again the whole thing reboots isn't it so i think sometimes that's the that's the analogy of what maybe what we want to achieve in the setting is it through synchrony i personally i i don't know and i'm not entirely sure i think if you of course if the people started understanding each other then that creates the conditions for this thing probably to happen because if i

If you don't understand me as a practitioner and don't understand you as a patient, it's pretty hard that actually I, I create the conditions of change.

So maybe it's through synchrony, but again, you know, it's as a sort of big question marks really.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

So just, yes, Zoe, please.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah.

So I think, um, going off what George said, yes, I think.

I mean, overall, the goal would be to minimize free energy, but to be able to do that, you have to sort of, at some point, challenge it, right?

You're not going to have the same belief that you think is the most efficient when you're born to when you die.

The way that you become youth reduces.

energy is going to change over time you'll see that especially in sort of pediatrics you see it in sports um there's a lot of studies with running for example that show that the more you run the more often the more mileage that people do when they run the more efficient they get so i think free energy is yes we all want to reduce it but at some point we've got to update it and challenge it right so it won't be sort of just this linear thing where you're constantly just

changing it you've got to update it and challenge it at some point so it will sort of be a little bit of a roller coaster and have a few dips where you've got to take that risk to see if there's another way that is more efficient on that will save it more um weather synchrony is always necessary i'm not sure i think i definitely think that when you're unsure whether

or if your prior is not so precise, and you're not 100% sure that that is the best way to do whatever you're doing, or you're not 100% certain that your belief is explained what's going on, then I think you're more likely to synchronize with others.

I think you once you're quite certain on what you think and what you're going to do, then it's a lot harder to

synchronize like with the cognitive sort of immunity when you've got chronic pain it's a lot harder to change that because you're convinced that you're you're right you've had this pain for years maybe and you know what it's like if you bend forward it's gonna hurt so why would you bother to challenge that um it's i think it's

Yeah, I think there's a lot of studies that show that, especially with sort of babies, that they synchronize with their, as they, when they're younger, the synchrony is very consistent.

Obviously, they need to work with their caregiver to get their amniotic needs and everything that they need to keep surviving.

But it shows that they do still think when they're adults.

but the time when they're older or in adulthood that they do think is when they're unsure with when, you know, something happened when you are near that caregiver and you, you don't, you don't know, you still sort of rely on, on them.

Say, I don't know, you get into a car accident or something.

Um, and there's a big shock and you're not sure you often the child will still, no matter how old they are, we'll look to the, to the parents, um,

unless the parent is very elderly.

But generally speaking, in times of uncertainty, you will look towards someone else.

So I think, is synchrony always necessary?

No.

But I think if you're not 100% certain with your priors, and you're questioning it, or there is a doubt of that, questioning it, then I think synchrony will play more of a role in it.

And I'll pass it back to Ian.


SPEAKER_01:
Awesome, thanks.

Yeah, just thinking about beliefs in the way that we might talk about them

Hey Blue, welcome.

Just the way that we might conversationally talk about beliefs, if somebody is unsure about something, that's when they look to be synchronized by some other informational resource.

I'm not sure what time this thing opens, so I'm going to look it up in this way, or I'm going to ask this person, or I'm not sure where to go, so I'm going to follow the crowd.

We see that kind of in the ant pheromone trail.

We see that in the social media, all these different areas.

And then conversely, when somebody does have a more confident, more built up prior, then that's more like going their own way and potentially

being more resistant to external contrasting information and then translating from that one conversational meaning of belief like i believe that is going to open at this time into a broader bayesian perspective on bayesian brain and body and like

thinking about pain and perception as also parameters that are can be seen as as beliefs in this bayesian sense so not always like a psychological experienced belief but in some statistical way it's like they're held stances that are updated in some way or partially or completely by certain kinds of incoming information so

ian and then also like this is going to be i think very interesting to return to the free energy minimization and unpack like what we mean by free energy there so ian go for it


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

So, yeah, I'm just sort of wanting to check that some of the language used in other realms of therapy, so this idea of self-regulation and co-regulation, are we saying here that this synchrony in therapeutic reliance is a form of co-regulation that we hear a lot about in people with dysautonomia?

problems with their autonomic nervous system.

And then we say you go to a therapist to help co-regulate your autonomic nervous system.

Is that what we're saying is synchrony is the kind of mechanism for co-regulation, which I believe fits with what you're saying, Zoe, that children need that more.

And as adults, we might do that occasionally.

And then I'm just thinking also, you know, other forms of therapeutic synchrony and co-regulation.

So meeting friends for a coffee.

Sometimes, you know, I might be having a bit of a stressful week or a wobble in some way.

And then I meet some friends and we kind of seek counsel in each other.

have a synchronize our movement of our hands to our mouth with a coffee cup or listen to some music together, tap our feet together.

And that's a kind of therapeutic.

So are we all kind of doing this on and off all the time?

They're my thoughts or questions.

Yes, George.

Zoe, then George.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, no, I just wanted to say yes with the co-regulation.

I think that we kind of, not always, but I think we do add an element to try and suggest that we'd like to say that we in part help co-regulation and co, we as a practitioner to achieve sort of recovery and reduce pain and how we, I think we all want to say that we help in that process.

and that we help regulate their sort of disruptive pattern, whether that's inflammation, whether that's pain, whatever sort of metrics that you want to rate your treatment by or whatever your treatment goals are that you're sort of working towards.

I think we all want to say that we sort of help regulate which ways we regulate in terms of whether our sort of

we actually change their heart rate or things like that.

We haven't got sort of, we're not always so specific about, or we don't have the research to kind of show that, but we, I think certainly there is elements of sort of synthetic and parasympathetic things that we do, as well as sort of the intent to co-regulate, even if we don't sort of empirically do it.

um or achieve it whether just that reassurance that we're attempting to help um regulate their their pain um i think is sort of the intention that i hope that as a practitioner i am giving off to my my patients and i'll let george speak um i think you know um


SPEAKER_04:
If you come from a manual therapy background, a touch-based, hands-on approach, one could argue, or old school kind of beliefs in the profession, just in osteopathy, would argue that actually

how you achieve that co-regulation, you know, autonomic nervous system, sympathetic, parasympathetic, is primarily through the use of techniques.

You know, you use a technique in a particular part of the body and this affects, you know, the parasympathetic part and so on.

Okay.

The vagus nerve and all that stuff.

That's sort of a...

implies there is a tool by which you can apply that stuff, treat that particular bit, and by miracle, modulate everything.

I used to be there, I'm no longer there because the evidence isn't strong enough to actually support those claims.

On the other hand, if we add another element, which is the element, the synchrony,

And the synchrony here goes beyond just that sort of passive practitioner-led type of intervention into something that implies communication, implies alignment, attuning to the environment, and the environment there is the practitioner as well.

to the other person in the room, the guy that is facilitating the process.

So it sort of takes us, I think, away from this idea that everything is about touch, everything is about the manual stuff and so on.

But it becomes a kind of a multi-pronged approach where touch matters, that communication matters as much as touch.

And it's not a technique X, Y, or Z, but it's actually the whole package of care that's likely to enable us to get there.

You know, is it similar to, you know, and I kind of, you know, I like your analogy to sort of, you know, tough day and so on.

You go out, you need to see your friends, you need to synchronize in a different environment because ultimately people, you know, will talk.

talk to each other and correlate regulate each other even in terms of reducing allostatic loads of a tough week and so on um there are kind of things that that are similar to what happens in the clinical setting one of them we're probably thinking about reward systems as well you know there's a there's a sort of a participation in something that is likely to

even if uncomfortable is led is going to lead to some improvement it kind of you know maybe maybe there's some dopamine stuff there maybe there's a reward pathways that are kind of involved in the whole thing like having a drink in the same having a therapeutic intervention that ultimately is going to get me to a better state i think you know it's very very analogous to moving away from the free energy principle and to an area that is

kind of works alongside that in activism, the concept of sense-making, you know?

So the kind of, and what inactivists would argue, participatory sense-making.

So synchrony could be kind of also looked from that lens, from that perspective.

Whereas if two people or more than two people

either in a group you know having a drink and all kind of helping each other because i listen and or in a therapeutic setting that sort of participatory things making uh minimizing free energy or autopoiesis for the the kind of the inactivists um actually i think you know we we we sort of uh looking at the same phenomena maybe with different language but arguably the same kind of phenomena so you say i think it's that package that

probably helps co-regulation rather than just one intervention.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Lou, welcome.

Do you want to add anything or ask anything?


SPEAKER_03:
Not right off the bat, just hi.

It's nice to be here with you guys.

I'm sorry I missed last week and I've really enjoyed the discussions with the papers so far.


SPEAKER_01:
um i'll jump in in a little bit i think you guys were engrossed in a in a good conversation so okay awesome so the dopamine angle and a few other things let's we'll return to but we were talking about minimizing free energy and i wanted to show a few images from the textbook

because even those who have seen free energy come up in a lot of different settings, sometimes returning to the basics is a generator that helps us take it in many other ways.

And for those who are maybe focused more on the clinical setting or have more of that background, this can provide a little

you know other tissues around the connective tissue free energy is being used like a connective tissue here it's bridging a lot of different ideas it's helping us connect different sensory modalities and therapeutic modalities so just a few cool images from the active inference textbook so here is figure 2.3 and it's the action perception loop

And the two ways that discrepancies related to predictions or expectations, the two ways that discrepancies about observations can be reduced just qualitatively is through changing belief and changing action.

And it's some blend of those two that individual entities are engaged in in this action perception loop.

And then when we're specifically talking about free energy, there's some type of equation.

This is like a simple form of it that is going to make that discrepancy minimization tractable and possible to calculate.

for at least us doing statistics from outside the system, if not for the system itself to do.

And what is the real sort of

hidden goal is this minimization of true surprise but the minimization of true surprise is intractable or it's inaccessible and so free energy serves as like this upper bound whereas if we can reduce this upper bound we're getting implicitly closer to this asymptotic reduction of surprise so

Who is doing this reduction of surprise?

That relates to the entity question.

What is the entity that's actually doing free energy minimization?

And so what are the entities that we're talking about here

what does it mean to minimize free energy and when is it and and i liked how earlier it was brought up when sometimes where that free energy minimization was going with the flow and then sometimes when there was a flow disrupt so what is free energy minimization and what are the entities and how are we modeling that ian and then anyone else


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Yeah, that question of what are the entities and linking it back to George's point about sense making and inactivism.

So in the paper, there was some really interesting stuff on the realising that we're all alike in the therapeutic alliance.

And

Relating that back to sense-making, I'm thinking that therapeutically or in a manual therapy or meeting friends, the outcome might be,

I'm not a weirdo.

I'm not, you know, I'm not, I haven't done anything wrong.

Everything's okay again.

I'm relaxed and that's therapeutic.

So, you know, I'm amongst people who are very much alike me and that's the sense-making.

There's the pattern recognition.

You know, I'm a valuable member of my tribe, however you want to describe it.

And then I think, you know, but we're not, we're never completely identical, right?

Or are we?

I don't know.

So the proposal in the paper is that that's the ultimate realisation that we're all alike.

And I can kind of see that that's a kind of relieving thing to realise.

But, you know, we're similar, but we're...

I'm similar to my pet dog in that I've got eyes and I breathe and my heart beats and I can synchronize in some ways with that and it feels nice, but my dog can't help me do my accounts, for example.

So, yes, this alikeness and how does that fit into sensemaking?

Thanks.

Luke?


SPEAKER_03:
So as I've been reading the textbook, I've been thinking a lot about the hidden states.

And it's interesting to think about that in terms of using touch to kind of resolve uncertainty about the hidden states.

Because while a state might be hidden to the patient, right, when you present with some, like, I've got a pain in my shoulder or something like that.

it might be easy for the therapist to say, oh, that's this, this, and I push here and tweak this, and then it's better.

So it might be hidden to the patient, but not hidden to the doctor, or hidden to the doctor and the patient, or hidden to...

the patient, but not the doctor or the doctor, but not the patient.

So it might be like all of these things.

And so it's like working together, this kind of synchrony to resolve uncertainty about, about a hidden state.

And I've, I've thought a lot about like who's making the observation and who's, who's doing the state observing and who is the state hidden to.

And, and it brings back the paper that you guys mentioned in the dot zero, the communication as active inference, because it really is like a bi-directional harmonious kind of


SPEAKER_04:
thing happening right awesome thanks yes george um yeah so um actually starting with the hidden states who's observing who's been observed i think uh

know the free energy model or picture the typical representation with the two agents and or one agent in the world and internal states external states and so on so if you have the two agents you know there's something in the middle that clearly is the ground where uh we kind of try to achieve some form of alignment and then um that sort of implies the reading of someone else's

internal state uh i think you know that who makes the observation who's been observed and so on i think again is is the bird song is a given take because there are clearly situations where you may be telling your patient that actually is nothing to worry about

for example where you're not particularly sure about what's going on and the patient can clearly read in your body language that no it's um is is hiding something from me right it's it's it's something there that doesn't feel right and and actually um there's an interesting phenomena for example with in chronic conditions um

is the concept of uh cognitive immunization where um it's very common these days for you know patient goes and sees a practitioner has read has consulted with dr google to start dr google said you know could be x y and z typically the worst case scenario goes and sees

uh doctor number one doctor number one says yeah you know what you know there's nothing to worry about there's nothing wrong with you question has got fine kind of saying all right i don't trust you kind of thing then goes and sees practitioner number two that comes with a different story and yeah okay maybe you forget about you've forgotten about something goes to practitioner number three and so on and gets through a process where authors argue that it's a kind of you know

the system becomes cognitively immune to any new explanations because

the expectation is surely there's something wrong with me so clearly in those conditions you know if we take from this lens one could argue uh yeah as a person i'm observing you i'm kind of reading your internal states which is i don't trust you kind of thing because you're actually telling me something but actually something that potentially you don't believe either okay or you know this thing about let's do cognitive reassurance because

most non-specific back pain or neck pain you know one cannot say that's clearly a particular tissue responsible for the pain the symptoms and so on so you say okay you know there's nothing serious with you so what's wrong with me you know clearly you can't tell the patient oh you've got non-specific back pain because for the patient that means you haven't got a clue about what's wrong with me or you're implying that something upstairs in my head i'm making it up

so patients observe us for sure and they know when we kind of are confident and so on and when we we're not so confident and maybe we're not entirely sure if actually the whole thing is gonna happen in the same way we observe patients we we start observing them you know when they come through the door

when you first greet them, and so on, hi, how you doing before COVID times, you know, shaking hands, and so on, were a pretty good first kind of getting into someone else's internal state.

Because just the, you know, the, the handshake, the quality of the amount of pressure, the confidence, and so on, in a lot of, you know, there were cases say, this person is anxious, this person is down, is depressed, and so on.

And you could get that down to

know when you clinic do clinical examination you touch you observe you you feel you palpate and so on so um that implies that there's a lot of unconscious stuff that it's you know it's process comes through arrives through our our sensory our sensorian and uh you know we make something out of it so

and that that's what we kind of um you know one of the things we try to explore through this stuff about you know try to understand someone else's internal state you know predicting a little bit of their mental state and that's where synchrony and that's where alignment um kind of plays that important role because you know

is no alignment i can't clearly guess what's wrong going on um the stuff about you know what what you ian what you mentioned about sense making and so on sense making is quite an interesting thing and he said okay you know we're not like you know a patient is a patient and the practitioner is a practitioner you know that is that

power differential as well.

There's the doctor, there's the patient.

When one is an expert and when the other is an expert and things alternate.

The whole thing about sense making and actually minimization of free energy and so on.

Sense making is quite an interesting thing too.

When we look at some clinical conditions and there's some beautiful stuff written about, for example, mental health and

inactive approaches and looking at, for example, depression as a disorder of sense-making, for example.

And you see that sometimes with patients with chronic musculoskeletal problems, they also have, you know, a comorbidity, they have depression.

What came first, the depression of the back or the back pain?

One could argue that if I suffer from chronic back pain and I can't get out of the house, I can't see my friends, I can't walk my dog, I can't play with my children and so on, the world stops kind of making sense, right?

You know, I don't go out because outside is a cruel world and it's kind of full of, you know, dangers and so on.

So I stay in a safe environment, which is my home, watching telly,

kind of uh you know complaining about myself to myself okay and uh and i become depressed because i'm stuck there so um the therapeutic will you know the therapeutic encounter that's sort of a nice psychological niche in a sense creates opportunity for sense making to to understand where there's patterns for example rigid behavior

rigid thinking that actually by understanding, by interacting, can potentially start sort of taking the patient in a particular direction, which is the sort of, you know, this kind of road to recovery.

And one, you know, one could argue that if someone starts feeling kind of bettering themselves,

symptoms reduce a little bit can start doing a little bit more can start again engaging with the world maybe the other stuff about feeling miserable would get better as well and i think that's that's sometimes what we see in musculoskeletal care is this stuff you know we don't treat mental health conditions and i don't think we should make those claims because they're clearly you know boundaries and competences and so on but

but you know the patient that has got for example a chronic musculoskeletal problem and gets better and gets an impact you know that impacts changes their quality of life changes their ability to you know become an agent again because pain they lost their agency because of pain

I think that's where the kind of the beauty of this understanding this stuff kind of comes is, you know, you can impact on some, you know, on different levels of the person, of the self, that is clearly not just that embodied self, that body, but it's beyond that embodied self, is the sort of, you know, this multi-dimensional kind of what is to be a person kind of thing, right?

So, yeah, I think at times it's about

kind of reading the others, you know, understanding the other guy's internal states is about sort of doing the right thing at the right time.

Because I know there's a cue that tells me maybe if I do this stuff, this could be really, you know, one way of getting in surprising the system in a very positive way.

Okay, so I've just been pontificating.

So, Zoe.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think similar to what George said on sort of it's a bird song.

I think there's different aspects where, you know, yes, generally on the technical, the physiology or the anatomy side, then the practitioner is always obviously more the expert.

But I think there's certain things where maybe you're looking at a patient or you're

you know still trying to examine them and

the the patient is still going to be the expert in their pain and so you you might be tossing and turning between a few diagnoses say and then the patient suddenly comes up with like oh yeah by the way and then what you were thinking completely goes out so i think you completely read them um there's always going to be sort of hidden states that you don't know about and then you kind of have to you're always on the lookout in case the situation is changing or

Maybe they don't want to tell you exactly what it is and you think something's missing, that intuition, that maybe there's an element of this that you're not getting or suddenly they got worse and you're wondering, well, what happened?

Like, what changed?

What goes on?

And then you find out that, you know...

their child's been really sick or something, or the work's been really stressful or something else has happened, excluding that they haven't said that you kind of pick up on.

So I think there's, there's that where you kind of, you're inferring what the other person means.

And there's definitely, you know, you're watching them, they're watching you and you're kind of still, you know, deciding what's going to happen based on the sort of what you think's going on.

And,

And throughout treatment, you know, there's no set treatment for certain things as well.

Like whether it's exercises or touch, you have to adapt based on what you're feeling.

And similarly to what you, it was Ian that brought it up before, the sort of synchrony and whether it's exact or not.

Well, it sort of also depends on the stimulus.

There's a lot of research that,

There was one paper that was about a film and they got two separate people to watch the same film by themselves at separate times.

But in certain parts of the film, their heart rate was exactly the same.

um their heart rate went up when you know the fight scene happened and then their heart rate went down the same and actually you know the difference was they were in sync even though they were nowhere near each other couldn't see each other didn't know what that person was doing they're probably doing completely different things but the stimulus dictated the synchrony um so i think that's an interesting thing to um

to consider as well that the synchrony might be from, from the stimulus that's happening during the treatment, whether it's touch, whether it's something else, but we focused on touch, but yeah, the, whether you synchronize just based on what you're in, in that moment.

But actually, you know, it's completely different otherwise.

So yeah, just wanted to point that out.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks.

That reminds me a lot of this direct interfacing.

mechanism of synchrony which might be via like auditory communication touch and so on and then there's this more stigmergy based niche modification construction of a niche like a corn maze where everybody walking through it is having a shared experience or like you said with two people watching the same film it's like there's some similarity in their niche and so there's

a resulting synchronization without direct interfacing because they're interacting in a shared, there's something shared about their niche.

Either two people going through the same niche at different moments, patients coming through a space, or there's people that are in separate physical spaces, but the niche has some similarity.

And I'm sure there's a lot of other examples like that.

Ian?

And then I have that image up if you want to describe what you wanted to share there.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Daniel.

Yeah, we'll describe that in a moment.

But as a conversation about films, I'm just thinking that Hollywood and filmmakers are actually masters of...

inducing synchrony really you know they've got the bird song so they've got the the beautiful music or the dramatic music or whatever you've got the imagery the words the the composition of the images to hopefully not obviously not everyone will have the same experience of a film but they hope that their sad film will induce some synchrony amongst the viewers in terms of the response in their body or a happy film will induce some kind of

Rhythmic laughter.

So I'm thinking about some work I've heard of recently of John Verveke looking at emotional goosebumps and how this links to, he thinks it's the process of temperature regulation is being exacted up into some kind of,

relevant or bringing things salient to us through goosebumps um and there's an opportunity there to kind of open up cognitively and explore some other ideas that maybe the person wasn't able to before and you can think okay that music gave me goosebumps and i had all these ideas um so yeah there's just a few things as we were talking there that i was thinking about but um this diagram was george as you were talking about the kind of how

You know, the complex things that might be at play within a patient.

This was done by MIT.

I only found out about it a few days ago.

It was 2015.

But all of these different factors that might lead someone into a kind of vicious cycle of depression.

And, you know, we've got things like...

cortisol or unbridled inflammation at the top there.

But then you've also got, as you said, George, the physical inactivity and how this, you've got all these different looping perception action cycles here that are creating this sort of downward spiral.

And therapeutically, I guess what we're trying to do is create an upward opening, trying to get an access point.

And Zoe, you said you might have to try lots of things.

You might have to try one of these loops and if that doesn't work, okay.

try a different loop to open up this sort of thing that's tightening and maybe open it up either physically or perceptually.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah thank you this is like very much showing that complex causation and so sometimes a disciplinary approach um might be like well hippocampal volume is associated with this change and that could absolutely be empirically true or cytokine signaling or early adverse experiences and so part of the challenge is reassembling this complex causal network

And then even if there were some sort of causal network that could be reassembled, then how might the failure mode

be similar or different from the recovery mode.

Like, there are certain things that cannot be changed, like in the past.

And there's other things, kind of like the concept of hysteresis, where we can't just reversibly modify something.

And so where are the leverage points in this diagram?

And it's, yeah.

George?


SPEAKER_04:
Um, yeah, it's, uh, pretty complex, but yeah, very good, very good diagram for sure.

And I think, you know, that there's a lot of stuff that we, you know, we are talking about that's clearly there.

Um, I think, you know, where, you know, clearly we have, you know, we have modifiable and non-modifiable things, you know, it's, it's a kind of a, there's stuff, you know, we can't change someone else, someone else's genetics.

We can't change what happened in the past.

But there are modifiable things that, at least in the context of musculoskeletal care, are present.

That can include beliefs, their ideas about pain, what's wrong with them and so on, down to things that could be lifestyle.

And lifestyle could be more movements,

kind of changing the diet or whatever, stop smoking, kind of engaging in something that starts getting them kind of, you know, start getting their sense-making back, okay?

Through the sense, you know, the ideas and actually where the other interesting thing about this stuff, you know, where are the opportunities?

You know, how can we start that process of change?

a very nice model, typically aligned more with an activist approach, now sort of finding ways into pain and so on, are the ecological psychology ideas about affordances.

You know, what is out there in the environment, you know, already linked, you know, some authors, the kind of reactive inference, predictive processing and so on.

But clearly one can think about, you know,

uh the world provides us with uh with a landscape of of affordances you know stuff that uh kind of are our opportunities for action which is basically what the description of an affordance is and one that lives in a very nice environment for example in a beautiful park and can walk you know along the coastline and uh you know for stress-free environment and so on clearly that that world

it's a world for a sort of, you know, beautiful kind of lifestyle and so on, right?

Whereas if one lives in an urban jungle and everybody's super stressed outside and so on, arguably that landscape kind of is much, much smaller.

And, you know, when we say, yeah, you know, would be good for you to start walking, for example, you know, that would be a good way of sort of start managing your back pain.

The patient can say, yeah, but, you know, when I get out of the house, I'm struggling, I might just get

run over by a car straight away.

The environment outside is awful, there's pollution everywhere.

What do you want me to do?

yeah i'm scared of going outside so no thank you very much but of course if you are on the other side of the of the spectrum and you can invite the person and use what's up there and start playing a little bit with those opportunities for action and i think that those are tools that if we think

Sometimes, you know, we can start thinking very hard about what sort of exercises should the patient do, should the person get engaged and so on.

And if we think much, you know, in much simpler terms and think about, you know, what's outside, what's out there, what kind of, you know, what kind of things are already in the environment that can be used.

to actually promote change, we would be surprised that actually just the flight of stairs would be good enough.

Don't take the lift, take the stairs and start sort of walking a little bit back and forth from home to work and so on.

Those minimal things, if the person feels like, yeah, OK, I'll have a go and I'll try that, clearly we are in that process of change,

kind of changing a little bit of their internal state.

Maybe that prior about, yeah, I can't move, I can't lift because it will damage my back.

In fact, when they start trusting their bodies, they can do a little bit more.

There's a kind of a, it's always hard to think about, okay, how can I change this?

How can I change the generative model?

And we almost think, you know, everything needs to be conscious, cognitive, and so on, when in fact, a lot of stuff happens unconsciously, right?

know if it was always about i'm going to think about changing and i'm going to do this and then the the world would be much simpler right but you know we you know a lot of stuff is hidden anyway and even the person is not aware of that stuff so but so so the change the process the tools and so on are kind of uh this is a facet you know that goes back to that

very good diagram with all these factors.

And I think as a practitioner, yes, okay, I can focus entirely on the brain and the neuroscience of it and become like a brain centric approach, or I can start thinking about actually the brain is, you know, it's the hardware kind of stuff, but there's much more in it and much more in it takes the person, takes the environment, takes the kind of opportunities and so on, the stuff out there can be used.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, George.

Zoe?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just going off of what George said in terms of the environment around it, like when you're sort of, maybe if you're surrounded by nature or things like that, then you might be sort of more willing or more able to change your priors.

I think it's also important to realize, especially through touch, that it's one

modality right it's one way in which we're starting to kind of try to understand and try to to manipulate the process of sort of changing those memories whether it's the way it's processed or just having initially or just trying to adapt it and that's the touch is one way but I think also it's

interesting that it's probably more likely that we may not be able to completely change that sort of uh prior but we might in that context so we might not change the fact that it's painful to bend down but we might be able to through touch and through sort of treatment get the patient to realize okay well yes maybe bending forwards is is dangerous it is is a bad thing but it's

if you do it in a certain way and you look at it in this way, then actually it's not so bad.

So I think it's important to take the context into it.

I think with this, I think we might be able to maybe not completely change the context,

a maladaptive belief but with touch we can try to change it so that it's more context specific rather than a general belief that isn't able to change we might be able to change it so in certain circumstances whether it's the way we do things or just the way that we approach things we might be able to update it or modify it for that specific thing um

I know the papers were talking about it in terms of being scared of spiders.

You might still be scared of spiders, but if you know that you're scared of spiders and they've got food nearby and they're just spiders happy, then maybe, yeah, the spider's still scary, but it's not likely to kill you or something like that.

In this circumstance, it's not as bad as it could be and you're going to be safe.

um from whatever sort of fear it is so i think that's an important thing um to add on from what george was saying and i'll pass it back to george yes george and then yeah uh now it's just you know what's always just sense kind of a yeah it's quite quite important and we you know through touch we can clearly get in kind of affect


SPEAKER_04:
understanding and so on.

I think that that's all the positive stuff about touch.

There's another factor, another side of the equation, which I think, you know, as practitioners, we need to be aware of, which is the power of, you know, what's the hidden state and that touch can trigger.

And particularly when in trauma situations, memories are embodied.

And when you touch someone in a particular part of the body,

That might, again, bring that unconscious stuff about, for example, someone has been a victim of sexual abuse, for example.

And you could touch a person and straight away, either there's a sort of a massive response, you know, fight or flight, you know, what's going on here?

Or you might actually, if it is about this sort of hidden state, you might actually find that, you know, that touch kind of created a response that is almost like a no-go zone.

And you kind of need to be aware that sometimes, you know, you touch people that don't like being touched.

If someone goes to a clinician that's, you know, in any intervention is primarily touch-based, doesn't like being touched,

uh it might you know might go well you might synchronize extremely well you know kind of they understand you they talk when you start say okay let's have a look let's palpate that you can feel like there's a there's a fight or flight kind of mode the person goes in straight away so i think understanding this is also quite important in understanding the limits of competence of someone

you know, in musculoskeletal care, for example, that that's an area that where probably the person needs to be referred to someone else, an expert in the area, or maybe by getting a sense of, you know, there's a response here that's not the one I would expect to perhaps not then to open the Pandora box.

Oh, tell me a little bit about what's going on here.

Because again, you know,

it's a kind of you know you you probably triggered you pressed on a button that uh yeah you know keep the lid on kind of thing don't open it please because so this is important i think both both ways is it's a kind of the the power as a therapeutic tool but also the power of triggering the responses that actually uh are quite you know quite important to take into account and in fact you know it's it

you know, the paper we got accepted yesterday, which is the continuation of this in musculoskeletal care.

And one of the reviewers actually wanted us to say, you know, there are, you know, psychologists in a psychotherapy treat people that memories are embodied and you need to be aware of avoiding overlaps.

Okay.

So that means don't jump into an area that you don't know about and, but be aware that sometimes, you know, you,

Yeah, you're getting that response is pretty much you're getting into someone's hidden states, stuff that is there in the background.

Just leave it alone, please.

That's the way at least I see my, you know, the world around me is like, don't sort of start the process that you don't want to.

Or if you don't, if you do, then go and see someone else.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_01:
Blue?

Or sorry, Ian, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, it's okay.

I didn't have my hand up.

So over to blue.

Okay, blue, go for it.


SPEAKER_03:
So it's interesting.

And I don't know if like in your work as an osteopath, but like, there's many layers, like I found like through working emotionally, physically on myself through my life, like it's like peeling an onion, right?

And so as you go through, it's interesting that like,

like all this stuff resurfaces and like even physical trauma remains there.

Like you stub your pinky toe, you stub your pinky toe 25 times, 35 times, 255 times, who knows how many times, right?

It depends on how clumsy you are, but, but your pinky toe remembers being stubbed.

It has maybe like a hyper response because it's been stubbed so many times because it's whatever that's it's, it's little job in life is to be stubbed, I think.

Um, but, but like, it's interesting that, um,

you kind of have to open it up to do the work.

And I wonder what kind of synchronous work there is.

I mean, I know that there are some people that deal with physical and emotional trauma.

And I know physical trauma can be a manifestation of emotional trauma.

And you can have emotional trauma based on your physical trauma.

So again, it's like this bi-directional circular loop.

And

I wonder what like the training is in osteopathy to deal with emotional trauma that may come up or what kind of like are there people that do integrative practices like you have to be like an osteopath and then maybe do your residency as a psychiatrist or what kind of, you know, can you get it all out?

Like if you have like some kind of linked problem that's both physical and emotional.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you.

George, then Io.

Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
So the model in terms of therapeutic alliance and synchrony and using touch, if we use to the whole world of healthcare practice, you know, could argue that, you know, in a world of psychotherapy, for example, mind-body kind of stuff, yeah, the person would be sort of...

equipped with the tools to explore to enable them to open up to start the process and being able to deal with that so so the paper as a as a kind of a generic kind of model that could apply you know

as an umbrella to a number of areas of practice, for sure, we can do that.

And no problem.

If we think specifically about manual therapy and specifically about osteopathy, then you've got two worlds, the American world of osteopathic medicine, where osteopathic medicine is medicine.

And, you know,

the there are there are osteopaths in the in the us who who are psychiatrists as well and in that case yes that person would be ideally uh suited to be able to explore that you know to do that to kind of a start that process of care actually using both their competences as a psychiatrist and their competences as a you know also manual therapist as a handle hands-on kind of a practitioner

In other countries, osteopets are primarily kind of

manual therapists if you want to call it that way although osteopaths don't like being called manual therapists but primarily use manual therapy primarily uh in musculoskeletal care but you know other areas of practice and we start seeing a number of practitioners going down the route of like physiotherapists using what is called a psychologically informed type of practice and that typically involves some additional training in counseling or some additional training in some

know cbt like kind of approaches like for example um something like accept acceptance and commitment therapy for example so stuff that actually combined with with hands-on is a sort of you know potentiates the effect of the treatment that the hands-on alone would not achieve but when you come from the two kind of two different angles meeting in the middle and providing a a more robust package of care

you can get better results because the training as a pre-registration level is very basic to enable you to recognize that there are things that need a referral to another practitioner.

Even those that practice a psychologically informed type of practice like

several physiotherapists uh have developed a kind of a traffic light system where clearly there are stuff on on the yellow that you know anxiety is associated with pain and so on that's okay you know you can deal with that there's some stuff kind of in the in the in the orange that you have to be a little bit careful and they're clearly stuff ptsds and so on uh where you know it's a no-go zone you know because

you know, you can dive in and then you don't know if you can come back, okay, kind of thing.

So that is typically a referral to another practitioner.

Having said that, I think there are opportunities for collaborative work where the two

together can actually provide a much better service to a person that simply relying on one practitioner that can do everything i think that's sometimes exploring stuff through the physical body the embodied self opens the doors for stuff to be explored at other elements of the self okay and when the body is a little bit more prepared to deal with stuff

and people maybe are prepared to talk.

Sometimes you see that in cases of childhood abuse and so on, you know.

Kind of had some stuff that felt good, some hands-on work, even the massage and the person felt a bit more confident in themselves and they were prepared then, let's have a chat.

And they were not prepared to simply go to a talk in therapy straight away because there was too much going on in their kind of embodied self.


SPEAKER_00:
the sirens go off when certain things happen exactly ian yes so um just sort of picking up on the points from george and the uh question from blue um

Yeah, really totally agree that it's, you know, not the job of a untrained manual therapist to kind of aim to open a can of worms of something that, you know, especially if it's not five minutes before the end of a session and then you kind of say, OK, I want to, you know, see you later, see you next week.

And I've got another client now and, you know, that's not...

definitely not a good idea.

However, as you said, George, sometimes people will come and they'll want to offer things and they'll want to talk about stuff

And what I was thinking about, Blue, as you were asking about sort of the different combinations of approaches, I don't know if George and Zoe or any of you are familiar with David Bocelli's work on TRE, trauma release or tension release exercises.

So what, you know, he doesn't really go into the story, so it's not kind of psychoanalytical or...

unraveling the stories of people's past but he has a methods for inducing kind of what i think is myofascial on what it looks like myofascial unwinding so sometimes it's tremoring um and um so it's sort of i don't think he necessarily uses touch in the beginning um but it's i guess what i'm thinking is that there are ways that if you know the ways of offering

clients opportunities to unravel the bodily trapped or the stuff that's held in the body that where they don't have to verbalize it if they don't want to.

But the

the inroad is to induce some kind of letting go, which maybe is what all manual therapy is about to a greater or lesser degree.

But his examples are quite dramatic.

People will be making big movements that seemingly are uncontrolled.

But if you ask them to stop at any time, they can stop.

They can bring it into voluntary.

But there seems to be a really big updating of some generative model through this process.

Yeah, they're my thoughts.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you.

I'm going to return to our previous complex causation network.

Now it's smaller because we're abstracting away from the details and think about like, what are some active inference questions that come to mind and how could we look at this differently than, for example, just a structural equation model that's fit from many empirical studies?

And so here's figure 4.3 from the textbook.

and this is a partially observable markov decision process and it's come up in other papers and live streams so we won't go into too much details but the kinds of things that we might want to ask are like what variables are latent states or observable in general and then in the specific case for example maybe there's a total

absolutely perfect association between hippocampus volume and some other clinical outcome.

And so hippocampus volume conceptually is observable.

It could be observed, but in that exact patient's case, it may not be an observable in that relationship.

So

variables can be observable in one context and latent in another context so that might speak to evidence-based grounding where like okay we don't know what somebody's blood level of this is what's the most informative thing to do maybe we can measure it and then that ties their measurements into other observables so that's one question what are observables and what are latent variables

um what variables do we have causal influence on what affordances exist that might have intervening influence on some unobserved state so here's like pi the policy selection and then the way that the hidden state is changing through time that's what the affordances are about influencing

hidden state is the true temperature of the room the thermometer is the observed value and then taking an action like turning on the air conditioning is about intervening in the hidden state such that other observables are seen and then we talked also about like in what ways can we change the generative model so here's the policy selection of the practitioner

And then in the interface, it's like it's meeting with the observations of the patient.

The actions of the practitioner, what they say and what they do are received as observations.

And that's kind of this dyad actinth that we've seen.

So rather than the one entity navigating and sense-making in the world, the joint sense-making

features this interface where the policy selections on one and their thinking through other minds, their inference on the generative model of the other is what is being intervened in.

How can we change the generative model, the cognitive models?

How can we change the generative process?

Could there be something welcoming on the door of the room that is a modification of the niche

or some other design choice that helps scaffold this therapeutic niche?

And yeah, what policies can be taken from the toolkit that is afforded in that moment based upon the training and the equipment available and so on that influence what to result in what?

And that kind of comes back to this synchrony for what question.

just achieving synchrony is like a sort of undirected hypnosis or undirected sort of i don't know it's just sort of like this vegetative propagation of coordination that would only coincidentally be functional so having a functional outcome in mind

then there can be a working backwards, like, well, what observations are we looking for?

And then what hidden states give rise to those observations and what policies exist that intervene in those hidden states and in the dynamics of how they change, recognizing like their complexity.

So those would just be a few active inference variables and approaches that are being invoked here conversationally

However, the kinds of models and the empirical data to take it further are being sketched out.

Well, it's going very fast and we're in kind of the home stretch.

So what would anyone like to look at or turn to?

We have a few other questions that previously had been raised that we

didn't perhaps get to some of them are written here so anything that people see here that they're interested in or any other topic and then also just how are we coming out of this dot too what will be different in our action as we are engaged in this area of course from many different perspectives George


SPEAKER_04:
I loved your kind of proposal, your summary of all the, you know, those active inference questions.

In fact, there's a structure for a paper in it, right?

It can take us down the road even just sort of looking at some computational stuff.

So creating some kind of, you know, a framework.

Yeah, so I very much like it.

I think there is a sort of,

challenge and what's what are the latent and observables uh and so on to define those kind of things that needs a little bit of thinking and we can you know the the other stuff i think you know as you said you know probably will you know working backwards would sort of becomes easier you know isn't it you know if when you kind of uh it is about hands-on with reassurance and you know

and so on, if that's a sort of what's, you know, the policy and so on, and what we observed, you know, back at the beginning, I think, you know, it's, it would be fascinating, I think, in terms of the bio by behavioral kind of elemental synchrony, there's clearly changes in in breathing changes in probably heart rate variability, and so on.

That would be interesting to

to understand, you know, is that a sign that the system is sort of starting changing?

The process, you know, you talked about the thing in the, you know, maybe something in the door of the room.

A couple of years ago when I was practicing in another country,

i i for quite a few months i used to use a lot of classical music and opera and so on and that was actually a tremendously effective way of creating an environment where the person sort of actually a form of inducing that synchrony and kind of you know i'm i'm treating i'm kind of doing this stuff i don't need to talk that much i'm kind of you know just

go with the sensations, go with the music.

And I felt that actually that was a very good way as a process of start changing the generative model.

So there is the stuff as we kind of proposed on the one of the recent papers, the stuff that you can implement.

So if you doing the tactile, the touch based intervention and use forms of language, sometimes

to get the person to visualize what you're doing.

For example, I'm doing this and I'm trying to achieve that.

And you know that the person is even like interceptively robust enough to let you explore the inner sensations to situations as you're probably doing some work and you realize by sort of predicting their internal states that they're just focusing too much and giving too much attention to stuff

which is actually not not useful where you can just say oh you know what uh like we said in the paper you know i i have a new dog and i kind of where does the dog come from but a dog in that sense is a way of sort of breaking down that that attention to what you're doing to sort of say

oh okay so you you continue you know there's still the sensory stimulation there is still that sensory evidence arriving to the system but actually you start changing a little bit you know you you you flattening a little bit of the sensory state by sort of zeroing the things and then maybe those sensations that come in um potentially kind of change some stuff so

yeah i think at this level that's for sure some some stuff uh to do i think it's an interesting thing that actually being started being explored now uh with uh ted kaptchuk lab in harvard uh around um acupuncture which is you know looking at synchrony as well with hyperscanning techniques

and kind of finding that actually successful in terms of the intervention is associated, again, with what?

Synchrony.

So kind of it's a body of evidence sort of building up, I think.

Quite nice.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
one thought on the free energy minimizing and ML Don and several others were discussing in the chat about like our biological systems truly finding global minima.

And so it's a big question, but just to give one thought on it is the free energy is calculated for a given policy sequence of actions in terms of how informative that sequence of actions is expected to be.

and how useful that sequence of action is supposed to be, expected to be.

And so different action pathways are evaluated based upon their ability to reduce uncertainty or provide direct value.

And so if we can just, maybe there's multiple things that have value in the therapeutic alliance, but one for the generative model of the practitioner might be like to reduce a number on a pain survey.

That would be useful.

And then there might be multiple policies and maybe adequacy is good enough.

And if the pathways are

to some balance or shifting balance of informative and useful, either reducing pain or helping understand how to reduce pain, then navigating and shifting policies

is something that can be done adaptively.

And then in contrast, the policies that might want to be disfavored would be like the ones that are adding confusion, reducing clarity of sensemaking, or increasing pain.

And that's not to say that there's not moments where transiently surprise does increase or pain does increase, but that is part of a policy.

Like, I'm going to touch this place.

that might transiently increase pain, but that might be an informative action that in a extended timeline is part of a free energy minimizing trajectory.

And so what is the horizon and so on.

George, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_04:
That thing, you know, sort of modifying pain, you know, modifying symptoms,

it's quite an interesting thing because, you know, for example, at least in my profession, there's this idea that, you know, we don't treat the symptoms, we treat the cause of the problem.

Okay.

So, you know, pain is just a symptom.

It's nothing to worry about.

Okay.

Um,

But, you know, from this perspective, actually, you know, changing symptoms, reducing symptoms is actually an important thing, quite an important thing, particularly if you're thinking about chronic conditions.

If you start making the person start feeling a little bit better, then you probably start changing the whole, you know, the whole process.

If you don't change anything, you know, how is the person going to engage in that if actually, you know, you can continue saying, oh, you know,

You're moving much better.

You know, your function is so much better, but actually the person says, you know, you know what, but it hasn't reduced at all.

I'm still in agony.

So, so I think, you know, going a little bit with small things at that level are quite important in the greater scheme of things in terms of changing the generative model.

Um,

So it is clearly, you know, a fundamental bit of the jigsaw.

And it's the same, we know, as you said, informing, for example, you know, this might be uncomfortable, but, in fact, is important in, in kind of, you know, achieving something.

So the same way some persons, some patients tell you, it is painful, but it's a good pain.

So again,

what's the value of the good pain is a reward is a sort of anticipation that this will lead to a positive change thank you zoe


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I think George just kind of touched upon what I was going to say.

Pain, you know, sometimes patients, I know I have patients that come to a session and they expect it to be painful.

I mean, a lot of people expect that at some point, you know, they might get that sort of, quote, good pain, where they know they almost want to feel like something's happening and whether that feedback is kind of,

pain or something that's kind of reassuring i know patients especially with sort of osteopathic manipulative um sort of treatment they they want the click if someone manipulates them they they they come in and go oh i just want you to click me

And, you know, the research shows that not necessarily you need that sound, but that feedback that they sort of want, they kind of want.

Some people, they expect if you do a hard sort of a more firm massage, they feel like they're, I don't know, getting a money's worth or they're getting more sort of treatment than if they want.

They want you to, they kind of want that feedback to say, yeah, you're in the right place, right?

And I get that a lot.

So I think pain is an interesting one.

I think it just, the biosynchrony that we get and we go upon, whether it is the patient's heart rate, their breathing changes, you see their facial expression changes when you're

Or the muscle tightens up nearby.

You kind of go on that.

But I think it's what they expect to get from treatment.

Not every patient is going to come in and go, yeah, I want to be in less pain.

That might not be their ultimate goal.

Obviously, they're not going to say no to it.

But they might really just want to be able to pick their kid up or...

go to sleep with just being able to go to sleep not being in pain or not waking up or something like that so I think it's not yes we can clinically it's not so simple as something that we can measure empirically it might be something that's you know a goal to that patient is more important than you know if their pain is less or if they're moving better or

oh, well, yeah, you know, if we had the technology to say, look, oh, look, your heart rate's lower, or this means that you're more efficient, you know, you're saving free energy because you're not expending on your pain, or, you know, you're more efficient, so it's not going to, you'll have more energy to do this now that you're doing this better.

They may not care.

They may just want to be able to pick their kid up and not be in pain.

So I think what we're measuring, I think, will be very individual to the patient.

And it might not be something that is necessarily useful in terms of research that we can quantify.

It just might be that goal that's not always sort of empirical.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you, Zoe.

Ian?


SPEAKER_06:
Ian?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Thanks all.

And yeah, just as you were saying that, you know, Zoe, you said at the beginning, I think the intention behind it all is to help them.

And I'm just thinking of a scenario or some scenarios of when, you know, agreeing on the goals is so important.

So I'm thinking short-term goals and long-term goals here.

So clients who are maybe endurance runners and, you know, they want to do,

fix ultra marathons a year and they come to you because their calves are hurting so your immediate goal is to reduce the pain in their calves so they can make the ultra marathon at the end of the month but then you know do i really if i'm if i'm aware as a therapist that there's a link between

endurance running and developing arrhythmias, heart arrhythmias, for example.

And I see this person is very anxious about their goals to the point where, you know, it's almost like they need it rather than it's a pleasure as such.

Then, you know, if I disagree with their goal, are we, am I true, you know, and saying actually maybe four ultra marathons a year would be enough for you.

Am I just enabling them

this drive by relieving your calf pain, um, in the short term.

Uh, so, you know, agreeing, I think agreeing on those like longer, you know, more broader life goals and, um, or referring to someone else, if I don't agree with, with that, or just, you know, that's a, that's a more of an ethical issue, but it came to mind as we were talking there.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah that reminds me of like the kind of performances that we might see in the olympics or the medical care that might happen like on the sideline of a game where somebody has been injured but they're gonna like continue doing it almost um in a way that is like rapidly degrading potentially the future weeks of their health and then that's the ethical challenge or the decision making challenge like is it

is it worth them to hobble across the finish line with an injury that every step is it's just deteriorating the injury but then being consistent with a belief that one is a finisher or even a signal to those who are watching there's so many complex phenomena at that level um those are very

interesting questions um wow so we're towards the end here i guess for the um authors and for anyone else we can give some of our last thoughts what are some of your next directions for this line of research and application okay so um well first of all


SPEAKER_04:
as uh as last time was a fascinating discussion i think kind of learning a lot from from this kind of interaction for sure um within this we we um

this is sort of got some stuff done in publishing the musculoskeletal side of things we have another paper to be submitted very soon the next week or so uh the same topic but in pediatrics and there's the bulk of other stuff building up um i think you know what we want to achieve now is to start

testing some of these ideas kind of empirically using different methods from qualitative kind of phenomenological type of approaches trying to understand really what's going on to more you know sort of um neuro bio stuff kind of along the lines of

looking at for example uh some some markers of by behavioral synchrony like for example um you know physiological changes in both the practitioner and and the patient bearing in mind some of this stuff it is a bit more challenging to achieve because uh whereas for example in the field of psychotherapy the person practitioner is typically sitting down

The guy doing manual therapy is moving around, so therefore the heart rate is not going to be exactly the same.

But looking at what can be done and creating some models as well.

So the idea around computational stuff also makes sense to test some of the ideas.

This is work that is building up.

So we very much look forward to kind of people getting in touch, bouncing off ideas from each other, kind of looking at how we can move forward with this.

It's not osteopathic specific is more than that.

I think at least it can be manual therapy,

know more broadening along those lines uh you can look at uh sort of uh you know the role of some of this stuff in chronic conditions not just pain but you know other other persistent physical symptoms uh and so on so that's that's where we are it's it's time now to start kind of uh testing some of this stuff for sure and stop writing theoretical papers


SPEAKER_06:
cool um zoe yeah um sort of what george said um we've got i've got um we've had one paper accepted for um msk so hopefully that will come out for everyone to read soon um we've got one waiting um

care.

Okay.

So for more orthopedic general, yeah, musculoskeletal muscle in muscle and bones kind of patients,

And then the pediatrics one is almost ready to submit.

And then, yeah, I guess we'll be looking towards seeing where it goes and what we can sort of empirically prove from all the theories that are kind of circulating and going from there.

But hopefully discussions like what everyone said now will give everyone more ideas to sort of

where we're going or where we could go and different ways to apply the principles and the frameworks that we've suggested so far.


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

George?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, just on the pediatrics, we actually have

you know, in the first lines to start exploring is, is, uh, synchrony between mother, baby and practitioner.

Um, starting with, um, not sure if you're going to be, we've been done, you know, we've been doing a,

a bit of work around, you know, the effect of touch on premature babies.

So we have those collaborations with hospitals in Italy that enable us to do some of that stuff.

But we sort of start looking also, you know, looking at this whole concept of synchrony on a triadic kind of thing.

So the baby, the practitioner and the mother, and see if actually if we find that, you know, the synchrony actually between

mother and baby is a marker of you know for example the baby would be you know some some some some markers of um you know uh autonomic change you know changes in autonomic arousal for example like we observed for example the effect of effective touch uh gentle touch on the baby and so on thank you ian


SPEAKER_00:
Uh, George, just as you were saying about the challenge of, um, a practitioner being moving whilst during the, you know, a manual therapy session and yeah, I'm sort of aware of how that does lead to some difficulties, especially with the PPG sort of measurement of heart rate variability.

Um, I heard just an idea I heard about, uh, I don't know if you've come across it, an EC, a wearable ECG that, um,

It's aimed at increasing respiratory sinus arrhythmia.

It vibrates and it stimulates the person, catches them at the top of their out-breath.

And it's designed to actually be used whilst you're walking around in everyday life.

So I'm just wondering if there's an opportunity there to...

because it's designed to A, increase RSA and B, to be used whilst moving, that might be an interesting piece of kit to use.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, absolutely.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

Blue, or would anyone else like any comments?


SPEAKER_03:
I just want to give a final thought.

So something that I'm going to be thinking about for

I don't know, whoever knows how long, is this idea of the emotional and physical body in terms of reference point.

So we studied in, I think, Livestream 40, the FEP for generic quantum systems, and it talked about how the FEP drives entanglement.

And

In this way, when there's perfect learning, there's this overlapping of the reference point.

So I just wonder how can an emotional body and a physical body be driven toward a more overlapping reference frame when those things are so fundamentally different?

So I'm going to be thinking about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Very cool.


SPEAKER_01:
All right, well, thank you for this excellent dot two.

That concludes 44 and really appreciated the authors joining.

And Blue, thank you for joining.

Ian, also for contributing so much with the dot zero.

And everyone is welcome back to give us updates on their learning and application on this very important area.

So thanks again, everybody.

See you later.

Thank you.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_07:
Goodbye.

Bye bye.