## dBAx-VDVcPQ

Hello, welcome.
It is April 9th, 2026
and we're in active inference model
stream 007.3
on pymdp 1.0, the JAX first release of
pymdp
with Connor Hines and other guests. So,
we will be hearing about pymdp release
and discussing some topics about
applications of active inference and the
package. So, thank you to Connor and all
the developers for their work. And
Connor to you, thank you.
Cool. Yeah, thanks a lot, Daniel.
Um yeah, happy to be with you all.
Thanks for attending.
Uh yeah, so I'm really excited to share
this release with you. Um this is
the 100 release of pymdp. Um this is an
active inference package
that we first started working on back in
2019 and it's matured and changed a lot
over the years.
So, this um talk uh this presentation is
about the 100 release, which is an
upgrade from the last release, which I
think was
almost 3 years ago or maybe a little
over than 3 years ago.
Um and the kind of biggest headline
change to highlight here is the fact
that we rewrote the entire back end of
pymdp in JAX.
Um so, now it's a kind of a JAX first,
JAX only package.
And because [clears throat] of that
rewrite
and motivating that rewrite
we have a bunch of new uh capabilities
uh for active inference agents in in
discrete state spaces. So, first of all,
just because it's in JAX, it's really
trivial to now put everything on GPUs
and TPUs.
Um that's just comes from having
everything in JAX. So, now you can run,
you know, whole groups, hundreds,
thousands of active inference agents uh
paralyzed on GPUs. You're only
constrained basically by your hardware
memory, whether it's GPU or TPU.
Um also, because it's in JAX, which is
natively fully differentiable, you can
kind of hook up arbitrary differentiable
modules to the front end or the back end
or in the middle of any pymdp agent. So,
that means you can pass gradients
through the whole system and do like
end-to-end learning sort of uh
workflows, which is cool.
Um and you know, it it it I would say um
significantly increases the
sort of things that you can do with
discrete pymdp agents. So, you can
imagine hooking up a pymdp agent to say
images or audio or more high-dimensional
uh input data than normally you couldn't
because of the kind of poor scaling
features you get with fully uh discrete
categorical inputs.
Um another big uh benefit of JAX is the
just-in-time compilation uh feature. So,
that allows you to basically run things
much faster uh cuz the kind of com-
computation graph of the full active
inference process is being compiled
ahead of time. And then you can actually
just execute that in this lower uh
accelerated linear algebra language XLA
that that JAX kind of writes and
dispatches to. So, um what that means in
practice is that now pymdp can be used
like a lot of these other JAX-based RL
frameworks where you can get really high
throughput simulations on arbitrary
JAX-based reinforcement learning
environments.
Um so, you can kind of JIT or
just-in-time compile the full
agent-environment loop and that allows
you to run things like orders of
magnitude than you would be able to in
the old um
un-JITed NumPy back end.
And so, beside all those I kind of just
core capabilities that are unlocked by
putting everything in JAX, there's also
just loads of new features.
Um so, new kind of algorithms that have
been developed in the last couple years
in the active inference community, like
sophisticated inference, inductive
inference,
um those are all now uh in integrated
into the new pymdp. So, those just allow
you uh to have smarter agents in the
end. So, you're actually using better
planning algorithms, better inference
algorithms.
Um another nice thing and actually this
is what originally motivated me and
Dimitri Markovik, who's on this call, I
believe.
What originally motivated us to write
the JAX back end, this was like, I think
going back to 2022 even, was the ability
to fit pymdp models or or active
inference pomdps to experimental data
from from, for instance, experimental
um psychology or or uh cognitive uh
computational neuroscience sort of
settings where you're actually measuring
the behavior of people as they perform
some task.
Um one of the things that's that many
people in the kind of more experimental
applied field of active inference do is
they want to fit the parameters of pomdp
models to data. So, it's basically like
kind of creating a uh synthetic active
inference agent that behaves like your
experimental participants. And um now
that everything is in JAX, you can
actually do that very efficiently using
uh NumPyro, using basically there's
there's other third-party JAX-based
probabilistic programming software like
NumPyro that allows you to um use
any of those variational or
sampling-based inference algorithms to
fit the parameters of pomdps to data.
So, this has been um really nicely
enabled by a package that Dimitri
Markovik wrote called
uh PyBaFit, which is a a package that
allows you to fit different models of
behavior to experimental data with both
NumPyro and Pyro, which is torch-based
back ends. So, pymdp now integrates with
PyBaFit, so you can fit uh
pomdp models to data really easily and
very quickly as well because uh NumPyro
is highly optimized and NumPyro is kind
of the JAX back end of PyBaFit.
Um there's a bunch of other things, so
I'll get into those with the slides. But
also, I just want to um kind of flag, as
you did Daniel at the beginning of this,
that this I'm I'm kind of a mouthpiece
for a larger team of people that have
been working on this for three, four
years uh that this this back end. So,
although I've done a lot of the work
maintaining and developing it, I do want
just everyone to, as you listen to this,
to know that what went into this was
like many, many man-hours, lots of
blood, sweat, and tears of many people.
So, I'm just kind of the the messenger
here.
But I'm happy and proud to to be showing
this to all of you.
Um so, yeah, as I mentioned, the back
end upgrade, uh the the accelerator
friendliness of it is one of the biggest
advantages.
So, if you really want to run very large
generative models or you want to run
them very quickly or you want to run
many generative models in parallel,
the best way to do that with JAX pymdp
is now on GPU or TPU. You can still get
quite good throughput and um speed on
CPU as well cuz JAX is just natively
fast because of the JIT thing. But if
you really want to crank like fitting uh
or running tens of thousands of active
inference agents in parallel, then you
can throw all your normal pymdp code
onto um a a Nvidia GPU accelerated
device and then you can just put all
your and then you'll just see huge gains
in throughput because of that, which is
really nice.
So, yeah.
Another big aspect of this is this is
both because of JAX and the way that
we've restructured the code is that
everything is now uh natively and
trivially parallelized. So, every
parameter tensor, every agent, every um
set of beliefs or actions or
observations now has an implicit leading
dimension. So, you can always basically
just arbitrarily stack observations,
agents, beliefs um in parallel. And so,
all the methods of the seemingly single
agent class are actually under the hood
broadcasted uh along this leading
dimension. So, it means you can
basically run
like the difference between running one
and 10,000 agents is just a matter of
one batch size parameter. Um so, this
makes it really nice for high-throughput
experimentation. Say you want to try
uh a batch of a thousand agents, 500 on
one environmental configuration and
another 500 on another, like two say
experimental configurations or they
maybe have different generative models
or different hyperparameter
configurations. That's really trivial to
do with just one instance of this agent
class, which is the main like entry
point and API for pymdp.
Um as I also mentioned, the JIT
compilation of the full
agent-environment interaction is
incredibly powerful. So, this does
require that your environment be
JITable, so it needs to be something
that you can pass into uh JAX
operations. So, that puts certain
constraints on on the sort of
computations happening inside the
environment. But once you have a
JAX-friendly environment, and if you go
on GitHub, there's loads of now uh
JAX-friendly RL environmental
simulators, like Gym Nax, Jumanji,
Navix, those are a few examples,
then you can just JIT the entire or
just-in-time compile the entire active
inference inference and planning and
action loop together with the
environmental step.
And then that whole thing can run super,
super fast. I mean, I'll show you some
figures later to just kind of
demonstrate the the speed gain.
And then finally, uh the
differentiability aspect. So, I kind of
mentioned this before, but you can
arbitrarily tie together differentiable
modules with pymdp agents and uh and
use gradients however you want. You
could freeze the encoder, you could
define the variational free energy or
expected free energy at the agent level
and then backpropagate that to the
encoder or decoder or whatever you want.
So, I think that native
differentiability of JAX, and we
specifically tested all the methods of
the agent class to make sure they're
differentiable and they pass like valid
finite gradients, that enables a lot of
different new creative um ways to to
generate uh pymdp agents.
Um so, yeah, because of the JAX back
end, there are do new constraints on the
way that you write code. So, there's a
lot of data structures that have changed
and a lot of kind of control flow
primitives that have changed like the
way you do for loops, the way that you
write agent environment loops has has
changed a bit. So, um
the biggest change I would say, I mean,
yeah, I'll go through all of them cuz
it's hard to like rank which one's the
biggest, but one of the big changes is
the way that we store uh
ragged arrays. So, before a ragged array
is basically arrays where the the sub
elements have different dimensions.
So, before we're using something called
an an uh NumPy object array, which is
kind of just like a list of arrays,
except that you can um you could in
theory create higher dimensional
versions like an array of of differently
shaped arrays.
So, to make uh that convention
compatible with JAX's uh
operations, which assume basically
everything is a PyTree, which is just a
sort of collection or or a data
structure with leaves at the end of the
day,
uh we made everything into
um lists, lists of JAX arrays. So, now
instead of NumPy object arrays, you just
have lists of arrays, and that's the
kind of the base data structure
uh
that that we store say
uh different posterior marginals. So, if
you have marginal distributions over
different hidden latent variables have
different lengths, different support uh
cardinalities, then you would store
those each as a different entry in a
list of of arrays. And these arrays
themselves, of course, are are JAX
arrays now. So, JAX has a sub library of
NumPy.
And that's the kind of um and it has
like the same semantics as an API as
as classic NumPy does.
And the other big thing is the using use
of explicit control of randomness
through these PRNG keys. So,
typically in NumPy, you'll you'll kind
of set randomness globally or at least
outside of particular operations. Like
you might have a script local seed or
like a repo or global um execution
runtime global seed. In JAX, you
actually have to pass seeds and keys all
all the way through every computation
that requires randomness.
So, that means most of the classic
functions that in involve randomness
like sampling from action, sampling
observations, all those things you now
have to actually pass a PRNG key into
the relevant function. So, it adds a
little bit of API overhead in the sense
that you're now passing in a new
argument all these functions, but the
nice thing is it it's really nice for
controlling reproducibility at different
parts in in a in a computation graph.
So, if you want to inject stochasticity
into just one part of an agent
environment loop, like just into the
action sampling or just into the
observation sampling, or if there's some
kind of stochasticity happening in the
inference, then you can kind of control
that along the way using these JAX uh
PRNG keys. Cuz the key point to to state
here is that every time you pass one of
these keys into a stochastic function,
the output will be the same if the key
is the same cuz it's just a
uh way of seeding um reproducibly the
randomness.
Another big um kind of API and like
programming philosophy shift is the fact
that now PyMDP is a lot more functional.
So, because it's JAX, there's a lot of
things you can't do. Like mutability is
um is different. There's really no uh
in-place operations and mutability of
data structures. What you actually have
to do is more write things as changes or
um creating instantiating new copies of
arrays.
So, there's no more in-place updates.
You can use there's conventions in JAX
like the {dot} {at} index set value
notation.
And uh and there's also constraints on
um having static shape and dtype of
input inputs to functions that are
just-in-time compiled. So, it means that
if you're say doing a uh a for loop in
JAX and you want to use the scan uh
primitive, which is a way to do really
fast just-in-time compiled for loops, it
means that you need to make sure that
all the inputs and outputs say if it's
the updates to a posterior belief that
they have the same shape and dtype. So,
often times you as a user do will not
have to worry about this at all because
it's all handled by the agent class, but
if you're ever like creating PyMDP
agents on your own, these are like new
constraints that you have to be aware
of. And basically any JAX-based uh
software has this these sorts of
constraints. But they they take a little
bit of getting used to, but they're
they're not honestly too hard to to
master.
And then as I also men- mentioned, old
uh NumPy kind of assumed single agent um
semantics everywhere. So, the agent
class really represented one agent, but
now the agent class in the JAX backend
na- uh naturally assumes that you can
always basically add
arbitrarily numbers of agents in in into
your single agent parameter tensor. So,
instead of having one A or B or C or D
tensor, you can just expand the leading
dimension and really run 50 different
agents in parallel. The only constraints
there is that you have to make sure that
all the generative models of those
agents have the same dimension so that
you can stack the parameter tensors
um vertically onto each other.
Um
Yeah, so what else?
Yeah, I guess
a big a big change is the um the the way
we do things like for loops. For
instance, instead of writing a a classic
Python for loop, you can use this
lax.scan notation. So, this is basically
a way of of JAX pre-compiling all the
steps of a for loop in advance given
that it knows like the the start and end
of the loop, and then as executing it
really quickly. Um also parallelization
is enabled by things like vmap. So, vmap
is vectorized map, and that's how this
vmap operator is how we
basically take methods that act on
single agent parameters and just
very trivially broadcast them across
multiple um agents, observations,
actions, or whatever. We're basically
just defining a bunch of methods that
operate on single agent
information, and then we broadcast using
vmap across multiple agents. So, that's
why it's very trivial in JAX once you've
written a function that operates say on
one row or one column of an array to
just trivially vmap it without having to
write your own custom broadcasting
semantics.
And of course, the biggest one is
probably JIT, the just-in-time
compilation. As I'll show in a bit,
JITing operations is like one of the
biggest ways to it's it is the biggest
way to increase throughput and speed
um in in in any JAX-based computation.
So, there's a little bit of overhead
time, very little relatively, to
actually compile the program in advance.
So, you always like JIT the program,
there's a warm-up time in actually
computing pre-computing that XLA
computation graph, and then once you
execute execute the JITed function, it's
incredibly fast. And it has a couple
constraints like you need to know the um
input
types of the arrays, the input shapes of
the arrays, and also the
types and shapes of the output arrays.
So, those are the constraints on like
JITed functions. That's more just like
kind of JAX 101, but these um properties
of JAX have now propagated forward into
PyMDP.
Um so, [clears throat] yeah, now I'll
give a just a quick example. So, in
old-style PyMDP, you might have a couple
of lines like this.
Don't know if you can see my cursor, but
on the left I'm highlighting this agent
um construction where you pass in some
AB
arrays. You might pass in some here
single modality trivial observation. You
do some state inference using that
observation using agent.infer_states.
You estimate the posterior over policies
and then the negative expected free
energy using infer_policies, and then
you sample an action. So, the nice thing
about this is very simple and clean.
Um and we've tried to make the the JAX
backend as little as little extra
complexity. We want to respect this
old-style like very
object-oriented API, but we're still
getting all the benefits of of JAX. So,
now in JAX,
in addition to just your A and B tensors
that you pass in, you can also pass in a
batch size.
So, if A and B, for instance, are just a
single agent parameter tensors, it'll
just broadcast this to be 10 different
agents all with the same A and B's. Or
you can pass in heterogeneous A's and
B's that have that leading dimension,
and then this will just basically this
can either be inferred or you can state
it declaratively to just basically tell
the agent class in advance, yeah,
there's 10 agents and they So, you can
look in the leading dimension of these
tensors to find the different models of
every agent.
Um the agent.infer_states now uh returns
a a QS variable. So, in the previous
um NumPy version, you could return QS,
but also QS was stored, which is the
posterior over hidden states. That was
stored internally on the agent. Now, the
posterior over hidden states is is
natively returned. That that's in line
with this whole functional philosophy of
JAX. So, there's no more posterior
belief variables stored on the agent
except for the parameters. The
parameters stay on the agent, but now
like the um
beliefs and actions get uh always
returned. So, the agent.infer_states
method acts more like a function, but we
still maintain the kind of method-like
API.
And so again, you pass in obs, and you
also pass in some kind of empirical
prior. So, this is very useful in
functional workflows where sometimes the
empirical prior will be something that's
stored on the agent. This is basically
the belief from the last time step, like
the D vector at the first time step of
inter- inference, or it can be something
that you're passing in from the outside,
for instance, like the last value of QS,
which is no longer available on the
agent because everything is functional
now.
Um and then infer_policies is basically
the same except now, again, because QS
is not stored on the agent, you actually
have to pass in the posterior belief
upon which the rollouts are going to be
based.
And also we've done some trivial things
like we renamed G to the negative EFE
just to be more explicit about that cuz
that was causing some confusion.
And then as I said before, you have to
be very um explicit about randomness
whenever you're doing something random.
So, for instance, when you're doing
action sampling, not only do you pass in
the posterior over policies, which again
was the return of agent.infer_policies,
but you also pass in random keys.
And these random keys can either differ
per agent, in which case you'll sample
random actions for every agent, or if
you want all the agents to use the exact
same random seed when they sample their
action, you could just use the same key
for all agents. But the point here is
that the random keys you have to pass
in, they have to have the same number of
elements as there are agents in your
batch. So, if you have 10 agents, then
you have to split the random key into 10
different keys, one for every agent.
Um so, that's really nice cuz then you
can basically control randomness
selectively across different agents,
uh either uniformly or you can break the
symmetry kind of in the in the agent
sampling.
Another really uh interesting and I
think semantically uh user-friendly
feature we added was this idea of the
model and distribution API. So, in these
um
in in this new kind of way of compiling
and building a model, you can actually
specify the whole graphical model using
a dict. So,
uh
basically the dict will will store
things like the names of the random
variables, like the observations, the
control states, and the hidden states.
And then within each of those um random
variable specific sub dicts, you'll have
a dict like the position observation
modality, which will have
its different elements, basically the
support of that categorical
distribution. The nice thing about all
these things is that they they just have
semantic labels, so it's no more like 1
2 3 4 and kind of arbitrary linear
indices into tensors, but all of these
variables actually can be associated
with semantic names that perhaps capture
some um specific constraints for your
task. So, this would be like
uh example of one of these model
description for a grid world where you
have some position observations that
correspond to like left, um
center left, center right, right. So,
this is like a 1D grid world. You could
have a move left or move right action.
And as you're writing these strings,
you're basically just assigning labels
to each of the kind of variables or
levels in the support of your
categorical distribution. So, once you
assemble this dict, which basically has
these high level observations, controls,
and state variables, then you can just
kind of pass that into this compile
model function, and it'll immediately
generate you a model which has fields
like A, B, C, D. And then what you can
do with that is you can actually index
semantically into those arrays using the
names of the modalities, like the
position observation modality, and then
within that modality index into
particular rows and columns of that A
matrix using the semantic labels of the
values. So, instead of doing some weird
nested indexing of like A01,2,3,
you're actually indexing with more um
semantically uh meaningful and
semantically like relatable uh terms.
So, for instance, this uh this line
right here, model.b_position,
is saying I want to look at the position
state factor, the the transitions
corresponding to the the position state
factor, and I want to look at what is
the probability of moving to the center
left given I'm currently in the left
uh position and I took action move
right.
So, it makes sense. If you're in the
left and you go closer to the center by
taking the move right action, that
probability is one. So, you can both
inspect, like query the generative
models, as well as set them um using
this sort of notation.
And then finally, once you've compiled
the model, you can just pass that model,
you basically unpack it with this double
uh asterisks notation cuz it's it's it's
a kind of a dict sort of structure. You
just unpack it, pass it into the agent
class, and then you will just create an
agent that has the A and B tensors um
that have been specified in this kind of
more semantic way. You still have to
fill out the probabilities in your
tensors. So, just by the uh providing
the description of what are the elements
of the tensors, what random variables
drive what other variables, you haven't
actually specified what those
probabilities are. So, you still have to
go in and build the generative model
that way, but at least you can establish
the connectivity and the names of all
the variables in your model just through
this kind of more string-based
interface.
Okay, yes. So, now that um I've kind of
introduced what the main features are of
the new JAX backend,
um there's still a a bit on model
fitting I want to get to, but I want to
just show some benchmarks on actually
um what the new JAX
backend buys you. So, here I just took a
kind of standard generative model. This
is the epistemic huge chaining task, so
it's kind of like a version of the
classic T maze that's a little bit more
temporally deep and it has multiple
cues.
So, just I just fixed the generative
model, um and then I
ran different backends of PyMDP for
different numbers of agents.
And I compared it, like so, the legacy
NumPy version, the JAX um version on
both CPU and GPU, and then I also
compared it to C++ active inference,
which is a a really optimized C++ based
active inference implementation that
came out a couple years ago, and which
showed really uh competitive I mean,
just superior results to NumPy uh PyMDP
at the time, which was incredibly slow.
So, I just wanted to like reproduce
those results and then also compare them
to um JAX.
So, just like quick before I get into
them, just quick details on the
epistemic huge chaining. These rollouts
were 12 steps, so pre- pretty small, so
you're not actually running into the
benefits of JITing the rollout at this
stage.
Um policy length four, still quite
small. The main thing here I wanted to
get out was the parallelization benefits
you get from running multiple agents, so
up to 512 agents.
And the NumPy legacy, I only ran up to
128 agents cuz it was just getting too
slow if you if you push it. So,
basically what you can see is you get
really high throughput that gets even
better on A100 GPU. I mean, running 512
of these small agents on the A100 is not
even getting close to the to the maximum
throughput you can get. So, I don't
exactly know what this number is and cuz
I it's somewhere between 10K and 100K,
but the point but on this logarithmic
scale, but it's incredibly incredibly
fast.
JAX, [snorts] even on the CPU, this is
Cython line, is also incredibly high
throughput. So, that Y axis I should
mention is agent steps per second. So,
this is like a classic measure of
throughput, it's like how many agent
steps are you performing for per second.
And the big throughput gain here is
because we're running multiple agents in
parallel. So, that's going to factor in
to the to the throughput. Basically, the
number of agent steps is going to scale
proportionally to the number of agents.
Um and then you have CPP AIF, which is
actually incredibly fast as well,
especially compared to the
um legacy
uh PyMDP, and you can see that if you
use 12 threads, so I think this supports
up to 24 threads. I guess it just
depends on how many threads you have in
your CPU, you can get really high
throughput, but it's still not as fast
as JAX, and I think that's just because
um CPP AIF also doesn't natively batch
across multiple agents. So, you can't
really parallelize effectively across
hundreds of agents. I think there's
still natively some sort of for- I mean,
there would have to be some sort of for
loop because the the parameter um
tensors are not don't have a leading
batch dimension. Where you get really
high throughput just by V-mapping over
that leading dimension in JAX.
Um [clears throat] so, another uh
kind of metric to look at is scaling in
the number of policies. So, once you
increase the horizon, say of your
planning problem, a classic issue with
this discrete time uh exhaustive tree
search active inference is that you get
really bad scaling in the number of
policies. So,
I'm still using native tree search here.
I haven't actually in- improved the
algorithm for doing tree search. I'm
still doing an exhaustive search over
very large number of policies,
but at least the the ability to run that
algorithmically still expensive tree
search, the cost of that is much lower
now with JAX. So, now on this Y axis,
we're just showing the raw runtime in
milliseconds, so lower is going to be a
better score.
And again, comparing NumPy legacy in
orange, the two types of C++ active
inference in one thread in purple, 12
threads in pink, and then the two
backends for JAX um PyMDP.
So, with 100 JAX PyMDP on on M2 on this
MacBook that I'm on right now, you get
increasing runtime just like all of the
rest in the number of policies, but it's
it's clearly much um
lower, absolutely. But the scaling
property is still pretty much the same.
It eventually gets kind of linear in the
number of policies.
On the GPU, it's much longer before you
start hitting this linear increase, and
that's because on with this much memory
on an A100 GPU, you're V-mapping over
policies, and you're really not hitting
kind of the hardware limits at that
level. So, once you start going to very
um many policies, and these are long
policies, too, of length 24, you'll
start getting you'll start
bottom-necking on memory and stuff like
that, and you'll start getting uh linear
increases in runtime. But absolutely
speaking, you're still running 16,384
policies in less than 50 milliseconds on
on the GPU. So, that's really nice. And
that's just because we're V-mapping. So,
we're not writing any fancy extra math
to deal with like parallelized
computation of uh policy posteriors.
We're just writing a single function
that evaluates the expected free energy
of one policy, and we've just written
that function in a way so that you can
V-map it trivially over, say, 16,000
policies.
So, that's just a really nice thing you
get out of the box by switching to this
uh JAX backend.
And then finally, I want to show some
results on time horizon scaling. So,
um this is basically showing the the
effect of using this rollout function
where you're kind of getting the entire
agent environment loop.
So, what's interesting here is if you
just look at
normal JAX,
um
increasing time horizon on the x-axis
measuring throughput, so agent steps per
second on on the y-axis.
If you just do a native JAX for loop
with no getting, none of that, it's
actually slower than NumPy. So, that
that just goes to show you really have
to get if you want to use JAX. Um and
this is So, this is measuring basically
the whole agent inference, um planning,
and action, and the environmental step
all in one for loop. That actually ends
up being slower than NumPy. I think if
you pushed the size of the generative
model, the batch size, of course,
because NumPy would have to for loop,
and then the number of policies, this
orange would actually
hop ahead of the Or sorry, the purple
would go ahead of of the orange in terms
of throughput. But for this small kind
of um
somewhat reasonable generative model
that you would might imagine someone's
using in like a pedagogical or research
context, JAX is actually going to be
slower.
Uh just the native for loop. However,
once you start getting things, uh
immediately the JAX
uh pops ahead. And this is all on CPU,
by the way. This is not on GPU.
So, the throughput is like basically
more than It's probably what 2,000
2,000 steps per second for just JIT
stepping. Uh so, just getting the full
step function and then running that
JITted step function in a for loop. And
then you get even better throughput if
you then JIT the entire agent
environment loop. So, the difference
basically between this green and the
yellow is whether we're getting the
entire agent environment interaction or
we're just getting the single step time
step function, which is just the agent
taking one active inference step and
then the environment taking one sampling
an observation given the action step.
So, there's already a difference there,
but it's actually not that big. But
then, once you start moving it to very
big time horizons and you put it on on a
a GPU, you're actually really taking
advantage of of the high throughput on a
GPU.
And also the fact that you're minimizing
dispatch between the CPU host and the
the GPU, the hardware that you're
running it on, that's when you really
start seeing the difference between
getting the full agent environment cycle
and um just doing a a Pythonic for loop
of the JITted step function. So, when
you have a really long time horizon, so
that imagine like a really long um agent
environment interaction,
then you start getting really, really
high throughput on a GPU. And this is
also batch size equals one. So, the
difference would be even greater if we
say we're running 1,000 agents in
parallel. But even for a single agent,
you can see that at a time horizon of
2,048, we're getting 3,400
agent steps per second. So, that's like
a really, really fast latency. Um you
can run loads of experiments this way.
Okay, so that's kind of the the
benchmarks and the sort of acceleration
that you just trivially get from putting
everything on JAX and V-mapping
everywhere.
And now I just want to highlight some of
the new planning and inference
algorithms.
So, um I think the biggest thing to
highlight here is the sophisticated
inference um algorithm. So, this is
uh basically a way to This is based on a
paper that came out in 2021. So,
sophisticated inference is a way to kind
of just do more intelligent planning.
Um
it actually, from an algorithmic
perspective, has worse scaling than the
original tree tree search-based active
inference cuz in sophisticated
inference, you're branching on both
future states
and future actions and future
observations. So, the thing about
sophisticated inference is what it
simulates is an agent taking an action,
getting a
a possible imagined observation given
that action, and then updating its
belief given that observation, and then
planning from that new belief state at
this imagined forward point in time. So,
you have to branch on the possible
observations you might see at each time
step in the future and then branch on
the actions you might take in the
future. So, from a pure algorithmic
perspective, it's actually a really bad
scaling algorithm in time horizon
because of this exponential explosion.
But there's a bunch of tricks you can
use to basically make the actual search
size of the search tree much, much
smaller. So, you can basically prune off
branches of the search tree based on the
expected um expected free energy that
you might get down one branch. And so,
we have a highly optimized JIT and JAX
compatible version of sophisticated
inference now in PyMDP. Um this was
mainly the work of Tim Ver Balen and
Riddhi Pitliya. Um so, they did a really
good job in in implementing that and
demoing it. So, just wanted to shout
that out cuz I think that's one of the
most powerful things about this new
release is the use
of sophisticated inference. Um there's a
lot of cases where you get demonstrably
better planning because of sophisticated
inference. The fact that you can
counterfactually update your or like
imagine how your beliefs would update in
light of new evidence allows you to make
much better informed decisions about
where to go next. So, one of the biggest
things I think about sophisticated
inference that's really attractive is
its ability to make information gain
task relevant. So, one of the problems
with classic
active inference is that there's this
intrinsic curiosity drive, so agents
will get distracted with parts of the
world that just have high information
gain. With sophisticated inference,
there will only be branches of the
search tree that are kind of upweighted
in terms of probability based on if that
resolved uncertainty then allows you to
further minimize expected free energy.
So, say if there's some hidden structure
in the world that upon discovering it
then allows you to maximize utility,
then that search tree will be or that
path in your search tree will be
preferred relative to one that's just
discovering hidden structure in the
world without any downstream
consequences for accomplishing your
goals.
So, it doesn't actually change the way
that curiosity or information gain
enters the objective, but because of the
recursive belief updating, it kind of
contextualizes the info gain to be more
sensitive to downstream rewards. So, I
think that's a really powerful just like
algorithmic feature or computational
feature of sophisticated inference that
hopefully people will explore and can do
so now at scale with high throughput
with this um implementation.
Another big one is inductive inference.
So, this is a way that you can kind of
plan um for a goal future in the future
that's in the future by kind of planning
backwards. So, if you have some
transition tensor that has very
deterministic dynamics, you can kind of
use your knowledge of the dynamics and
the your knowledge of the goal state to
kind of prune the the originally
exponentially expansive search tree to
just a set of paths that um they you
know a priori
uh uh
have reachability between the goal and
your starting state. So, it's kind of
like um
uh
induction like the
dynamic programming. It's sort of this
the same principle where if you start
with the goal and then back propagate
the goal to to optimize your current
policy, it's that same principle, but
it's just using the the B tensor of your
active inference model to kind of
generate that
that inductive uh planning algorithm.
How it actually manifests in practice is
just an extra cost to your expected free
energy for policies. That's called an
inductive cost. So, it basically is a
cost that measures
um sure I could take this policy, but
how
how reachable is my final end state if I
were to take this policy. So, that
inductive cost kind of suppresses
policies that will bring you into parts
of the state space that are kind of like
um
uh sinks in the dynamics in the
transition dynamics of of the B matrix.
Um another big thing that's again
enabled by JAX is this um exact
filtering and smoothing in HMMs.
So, typically in active inference, we
use
message passing algorithms for the
hidden state inference step. So, things
like variational message passing,
marginal message passing,
belief propagation.
Um
but actually, there's nothing stopping
you from using better inference
algorithms for the hidden state
inference. So, what we did here is we
actually implemented exact inference on
HMMs. So, you actually don't need to use
an approximation for the inference if
you if the
generative model satisfies certain
properties. So, for instance, if the
generative model has a single hidden
state factor, you can actually do exact
inference on it.
And so, what we do is we we took an
inspiration from another JAX-based
package called DynaMax, which is for
fitting state space models in JAX.
And they have a really efficient um
associative scan-based algorithm for
fitting HMMs, both linear Gaussian HMMs
as well as discrete ones.
And so, we just basically took that and
and and did a more PyMDP-friendly
implementation of it and now are using
it here. The nice thing about
associative scan is it's actually
sublinear in time horizon. So, it kind
of does a quasi parallelization of the
treatment of time steps. Um
It's I think logarithmic in time. So,
the way it does this is it kind of takes
the associativity of the transition
operator as it operates on on a chain of
of time steps, and you can take
advantage of that to kind of divide the
full inference problem into a bunch of
subproblems that can be treated in
parallel. That's why it's like a
logarithmic in time because you're kind
of bisecting the sequence and then
bisecting the the subsequences. So, it
has this logarithmic scaling property.
Um so, that's also really nice and it
scales really nicely in long sequences.
So, you can do full filtering and
smoothing of your posterior states using
this associative scan.
Um despite that algorithm existing, we
still included the MMP and VMP
algorithms in the repo, but now they're
very highly optimized. They're much
faster
and they're fully differentiable, too.
So, you can pass gradients through them
and all that stuff.
Another big thing is this sparse
dependency structure. I think this was
also released in the last PMD P007, but
now it's actually just more flexible,
more fully integrated through the repo.
And what this means is you can kind of
specify the conditional dependency
structure of your generative model in a
much more um sparse way. So, for
instance, not all observation modalities
depend on all hidden state factors, and
you want to take advantage of that. In
the old PMD P and the old SPM, although
I think this is now also updated in SPM,
you would have to assume the kind of
naively that all hidden state factors
drive all observation modalities, and
what that in practice means is you just
have loads of redundant information in
your parameter tensors. But, if you know
that say only um the position
observation is driven by the position
hidden state, then you can make your
position observation no longer dependent
on the weather hidden state or some
other hidden state, and you can
basically chop off the dependency, and
the result is you get much smaller
parameter tensors.
So, now that's all integrated as well.
You can do it both for the A like the
hidden state to observation dependency.
You can also do it for hidden state at
time T to hidden state at time T plus
one dependency. So, multiple hidden
state factors can drive multiple other
hidden state factors. And then you can
also do this with action. So, action
control factors um typically just drive
a single hidden state factor, but now
with these B action dependencies, it's
another list of basically specifying the
dependency graph. You can have one
control factor drive multiple hidden
states or multiple control factors drive
one hidden state. So, all that
flexibility is now um built in. It It's
It was hard to engineer that in with all
the constraints of JAX, but we managed
to do it, so the inference is much
faster, and you're not wasting
computation.
Okay, so one I think of the most This
was actually one of the original
motivations for moving to the JAX back
end, and one of the most important
things for people working in cognitive
neuroscience and experimental psychology
is the idea of fitting PMD Ps to
behavioral data.
So, the the setting is kind of that you
have some participants in say a
psychology or psychophysics or cognitive
neuroscience study. They're taking
actions. You You're recording what
they're seeing say on like a screen or
some kind of stimulus setup, and you
want to describe their decisions as
being driven by an active inference
agent. So, this is like an inverse
problem of what are the parameters of an
active inference agent that best
describe the experimental decisions that
this person made.
And now we can do that very easily in
JAX. So, once we translated everything
to JAX, it made
putting PMD P active inference loops
into the forward model of the likelihood
model of a generative model of someone's
behavior very trivial. And this is
basically enabled by this package PyBa
Fit by Dimitri Markovik, which is really
nice cuz it allows you not [snorts] only
to use PMD P to fit uh the new JAX PMD P
to fit active inference models to
experimental data, but you can compare
it to other agent-based decision-making
models like reinforcement learning, for
instance, and variants of Bayesian or
non-Bayesian reinforcement learning.
So, here on the right, I just have a
very simple example of
using NUTS, which is the No-U-Turn
Sampler. It's like a very optimized way
of doing
um Hamiltonian Monte Carlo to infer the
parameter posteriors from a bunch of T
mazes, these classic agents
making decisions. So, the parameter that
we're inferring here is the agent's
beliefs about the reward probability
associated with choosing the correct
arm. Um so, that's like a classic thing
that kind of trades off the
explore-exploit dilemma for the T mazes
agent, and you can see by using NUTS
that you can basically recover uh
distributions over the parameter
posteriors that roughly track the true
reward probability. There's different
experimental setups where the
recoverability will be much better, but
this was something I whipped up probably
in 20 minutes and just ran it, and you
get a pretty nice correlation. So,
there's nice things like that um they
are now possible, and hopefully this is
going to be one of the things that will
actually allow people to start using PMD
P actually to fit experimental data.
Um the other nice thing about this is
because it's all backed by NumPyro, you
don't have to use HMC NUTS. You know,
for certain inference problems, you
might want to use
um stochastic variational inference or
black box variational inference to fit
it, or you might want to use the Laplace
method, like Laplace variational
inference. So, basically, there's a a
whole load of different
priors and inference algorithms and
parameterizations of those priors and
posteriors that you can use uh in in
NumPyro, and that's very nicely packaged
together in PyBa Fit. So, a lot of the
kind of low-level choices are abstracted
away from you by PyBa Fit, and you can
kind of try out different techniques for
fitting your your experimental data. You
don't need to commit to one particular
inference algorithm.
Um yeah, so another big thing is the new
documentation. So, the documentation now
includes way more examples than before.
Um so, there's a ton of new JAX-focused
notebooks that show different uses, all
those things I talked about,
sophisticated inference, inductive
inference,
um model fitting to behavioral data,
uh
just using sparse tensors. It's
something I didn't even talk about. You
can actually also do very
high-throughput computation by using
sparse tensors, which is something
supported by JAX.
Um there's now notebooks for all of
these things that you can access on the
docs, and after this I'll I'll just
quickly hop over to the docs to show
everyone that.
Um and then yeah, there's also going
back to the your simple grid world T
mazes,
all those like classic examples are
still included there. There's also a T
maze with distractors notebook that
explains the whole benefits of using
sophisticated inference.
And also the docs themselves just have a
better theme and kind of general
makeover compared to how they used to
be.
>> [gasps]
>> Um [clears throat] so, yeah, um I'll
pretty much close up with that. I guess
it's almost been an hour now. Um so,
yeah, uh links here. Here's the code.
The docs will We can hop over to that
after this. Release notes, and then if
there's any issues you ever have, feel
free to create an issue in PMD P. Just
added a little simulation of running a
bunch of agents in parallel using
inductive inference.
Um and I also want to acknowledge
There's a lot of people not on this list
who also worked and contributed to PMD
P, but just I wanted to highlight a few
key people, especially um Tim Ver Balen.
He put in a lot of effort into into
building PMD P. I want to acknowledge
his effort sophisticated inference,
battle testing PMD P in different
circumstances with his own use cases in
like robotics and various kind of more
high-dimensional specialized domains.
Um Dimitri Markovik, he was the one who
first convinced me and said we should do
this in JAX if you want to fit people's
behavior to it, and he was kind of the
main architect of a lot of the key
choices that went into the JAX back end.
So, I want to thank him a lot. I mean,
yeah, this basically wouldn't be
possible without him. I didn't even know
what JAX was when we first started
talking about this.
Um Reddy was also huge in developing the
um
sophisticated inference implementation
and also using active inference in PMD P
in
a lot of her own projects and just
adding new features, working on the
model compilation,
uh model description. Arun, who I think
is also here, was really great in
helping us organize the full um
uh 100 release
like
workflow and getting all the issues in
in play and also just keeping us on
track on on getting things and also
adding features as well, doing all of
that, CI features, also fundamental PMD
P features, doing an RGM implementation
as well. There's like a lot of really
good things, and and I'm really grateful
for that. And then there's just loads of
other people who have contributed
various things. I can't name everyone's
contribution,
but uh yeah, so I just want to
acknowledge that this was really a team
effort, and it was
it's a good expression of a lot of
people being interested in this
technology across a lot of disciplines.
Um yeah, so with that I'll end. I don't
know um Daniel, do you Should I first
hop to the docs, or do you want to have
some discussion first? I am pretty open
to whatever.
Yeah, how about um
meanwhile, anyone else can can add any
comments
or ask any questions to Connor, or just
bring up any points that weren't
covered,
and then we'll look at the docs, look at
some of the examples.
Yeah, sounds great.
Yeah, Peter
Yeah, Peter Yeah, Connor Connor, you can
call on here if you want.
You You're moderating.
Thanks, Connor. But, also by the way,
looking forward to seeing the docs, so
I'm also happy to wait till after that.
Uh
what do you think?
I have a
few questions, as you can probably
imagine.
Yeah, okay. Maybe Maybe we just quickly
go through the docs and do then do the
questions then. Yeah, I think that'll be
easier cuz it'll maybe then interrupt
the discussion. So, yeah, this is the
main documentation. It's still
uh like Read the Docs base, but now
using this MkDocs kind of thing, and I'm
using the Dracula theme. Might change
that at some point, but I kind of liked
the colors for now. So, this is the main
page.
Um there's a getting started tab over
here, installation. We're doing
everything through UV now, so that makes
things a lot easier. It's better than
pip in my experience.
There's a bunch of different dependency
groups, like if you're doing model
fitting, if you have a GPU on hand,
um if you want to mess with the docs or
run notebooks.
So, that that's pretty extensive.
Um see, there's also a JAX quick start
uh, that just shows you how to like run
something quickly in Jax. This is same
idea as what we used to have in NumPy,
but just now everything is more
uh, Jax friendly. A lot of these default
generation functions as well, they used
to be just uh, NumPy only right now Jax
based. So, ran generating random A
arrays, B arrays, uniform distributions,
stuff like that.
Um, there's a lot of different guides on
specific things. So, this rollout
function for the compiled agent
environment loops, um, this is really
nice uh, uh,
thing because of the throughput it gets
you and it's really nice uh, the API as
well. So, basically, once you've defined
your agent and your Jax JIT compatible
environment, you just pass the agent,
the environment into the rollout
function, set some time horizon, how
many steps you want to run, and then RNG
key, so a random key to seed the
randomness.
And then what you'll get is the
trajectory of the agent states over the
history of the rollout, so their
beliefs, actions, observations, uh,
posteriors over policies, as well as
like the final state of the agent and
any other like relevant info. Um,
so I find that really nice.
Um, yeah, so that's just a guide about
how to use that uh,
and as I said um, before the agent and
invent and are both natively batched.
So, if you just add a leading dimension
to your agent or to your environments,
you can just easily run multiple agents
and multiple environments in parallel.
One agent for
every environment or one environment
with 50 different agents, you can do all
of that with this rollout thing.
Um, yeah, there's just kind of new uh,
building blocks for envs themselves, how
you make the environments, how you
instantiate them.
Um, there's yeah, actually one thing
that I didn't mention, there's this new
PyMDP env structure. So, now you can
make an environment and initialize it
with the same parameters that you used
to initialize the agent. So, you can
basically make an environment using the
A, B, and D tensors you used to generate
the agent.
And then you'll basically have an
isomorphism between the generative
process and the generative model. So,
that's a good way to kind of test out
uh, what assumptions can be broken on
the environment side without
compromising performance on the agent
side. So, that's kind of this ideal
situation. But, of course, you can also
run
any arbitrary environments with a PyMDP
agent. They don't need to be structured
this way. It's just a kind of a special
case.
This is uh, there's just a a classic
tutorial on how to think about
generative models, hidden state factors,
and modalities.
Oh, yeah, and then there's the kind of
um, tutorials. So, we have this notebook
gallery now that has subsections for the
different tutorials. So, there's like
kind of a getting started subset, which
includes
how to build generative models with this
new model construction API, so the model
description dict and all that stuff.
So, this is showing how you would build
this thing with like strings and then
populate it with uh, probabilities. And
then finally, once you have the actual
model, you can create an agent with it
and then start running things with
rollout or with with whatever you want.
Um, T maze demo, T maze with
distractors, that's this one where
there's like some sources of information
that are irrelevant to the task, some
that are.
Um,
graph worlds, yeah, there's there's all
sorts of things. Uh,
there's a a whole set of notebooks just
on sophisticated inference and
highlighting its different advantages
under different um, settings. So, like
in the T maze, the T maze with
distractors, on a graph worlds where an
agent is navigating a a gen a
like a world that's structured like a
graph, so some nodes are reachable from
others.
Two on inductive inference, um, learning
parameters, so updating the A and B
matrices from data. So, that's done on a
grid world example.
Maybe also fit uh, highlight the pipe of
fit one. So, this is the one I I
described before where you're basically
uh, creating a T maze agent in a
generative model, sampling the behavior
of that T maze agent.
So, for instance, here I was sampling
looks like uh,
10 different agents.
And then using those 10 agents and
fitting their posterior uh, parameters
with nuts,
um, the HMC, or fitting it with
in just a couple lines you can, so
that's fitting it with nuts or that you
can switch to a different inference
algorithm like black box variation
variational inference and it's the same
uh, same idea. You can basically use
different inference algorithms to fit
your your models uh, to experimental
data, which is really nice. And this is
all made super easy with this pipe of
fit package. So, you have different kind
of wrappers on nuts and SVI and
different uh, inference algorithms.
Um,
oh, yeah, here's a kind of a cool one is
uh, using PyMDP together with a neural
encoder. So, this is training a very
small MLP to embed um, continuous
observations into the discrete
observation space of a uh, a PyMDP
agent. So, this is an example right here
on the left, an agent is seeing
basically continuous 2D observations
from these Gaussian clusters, but it's
learning end to end to map those
continuous 2D observations to discrete
states. And then it's doing planning in
the that discrete state space to say go
from
mode one to mode two, three, four, five.
So, this is just a demonstration of how
you can basically train PyMDP agents end
to end to map from continuous
observations into a discrete space on
which they can do all the message
passing and planning.
Um, so that was just one very
yeah, this is an example of showing the
agent um, doing the same planning, but
now what I'm plotting here are the
decision boundaries of the MLP, the
multi-layer perceptron that was trained
as a front end. So, you can see
basically that the MLP is learning to
partition the space into these discrete
states that the agent can then do
planning on.
Um, yeah, but there's these are very
elementary, I would say, demonstrations
of the full capabilities. I feel like
there's a lot more people can do with
the whole differentiability side of
things.
Um,
yeah, I think I'll I'll I'll end there.
If anyone wants to dive into a
particular notebook, I'm happy to do
that as well.
Maybe Pedro, we can come back to you
now.
Okay. Um, I'm just looking at my So,
thank you, Connor.
It's very exciting. Congratulations. The
whole field has been waiting for this
for a while and and there's joy in the
streets and it's an inspiration.
>> Thanks.
Good to see.
>> [laughter]
>> And well, thank you to the rest of the
people who worked on this. So, I see
Dimitri and Aaron and some other people.
And um,
I was just as a note, as you know, I'm
working on the Julia version, which kind
of looks up to PyMDP as its big brother.
So, that's it's very nice and a lot of
the
exciting points you brought up are
exactly the
the some of our goals, right? So, we're
So, thanks for the inspiration on that
point as well.
Um,
>> Yeah, definitely. I just but sorry to
interrupt you. I This is one thing I
actually want to do is to also benchmark
it against active inference.jl and
rxinfer, but I just didn't have time, to
be honest. But, I I yeah, that that
would be really cool to do as well cuz I
know Julia is incredibly fast, too, and
has the JIT stuff kind of built in.
So, we are
we are moving towards the new release.
When that's done, I think it would be
nice to do. Maybe we can do that
together.
Yeah, yeah.
Um,
but enough talk about my own package,
that that's not the point right now. I
suppose.
Um,
so maybe So, one question I had was
because um, my only worry personally
with Jax has been that it's harder to go
and
and poke
as a not master expert level developer
behind the package. So, let's say I want
to add a different parameter learning
function instead of
uh, the Ryan Smith style and I want to
have a different parameterization. I
want to throw in a a Gaussian filter to
do it or something like that.
How easy is it to go and change kind of
the internals in that way? Is it Can Can
I just plug in a function for that? Is
that a plan? What do you think? Yeah,
that's a good question. So, I would say
that I see I saw there's two ends on the
on the it's harder as an entry point for
sure on the functional programming side
of things. Like you're forced to code
functionally, so you
have to s- um,
kind of do away with these assumptions
of storing state on objects, like on as
properties and attributes of a class,
right? It's a lot more You can of course
have PyTrees that have properties, but
it's a lot more instantiating a new
instance of a class or a PyTree every
time you want to change something. So,
that takes some getting used to. And
also passing keys everywhere.
On the other hand, I think the way we
wrote it is actually incredibly amenable
to this modular, I want to go in and add
a new thing approach. So, this is one of
the things I had to deal with when
adding the associative scan based
inference cuz now I was adding a new new
inference algorithm next to VMP and MMP.
I think we've written it in a way that
actually makes it easy specifically
because of the V mapping aspect across
agents. So, when you're thinking of your
algorithm, you don't have to immediately
imagine, oh, how's this going to
broadcast against like a thousand
agents? As long as you write it
according to the Jax convention, so
functional,
uh, no in place updates, um, keeping
dtypes and shapes static between input
and output, again, that is a constraint,
and passing in an RNG key if you need
randomness anywhere. As long as you obey
those constraints, you can basically
just write a new function, add it to
inference.py, which is still one of the
libraries that handles inference,
um, or algos.py if it's an inference
algorithm or learning.py if it's a new
learning algorithm. And then that can
get and then you would also have to add
some kind of um
learning you would have to go into the
update parameters method of the agent
and say,
you know, if if I want to use this
algorithm then I'm going to dispatch to
this learning.py function. So that kind
of still that structure that was in the
NumPy version where there's agent
methods and those agent methods then
call and import functions from the sub
sub libraries and then call those rather
than define all the all the math and
computation in the agent class. That
structure still remains. So you still
have that modularity.
Um
yeah. I have a question um
on that cuz I think it might be nice for
the tutorial on
I want PiMDP but with this other
parameter learning function or something
or with this other planning
model or
with this other
variant of expected free energy as loss
function or something like that.
It's just a thought.
Yeah, there So in this validating
sophisticated inference I believe that
there is
a for specifically for this one case of
switching between vanilla planning and
and sophisticated planning I think there
is an example that shows you how to
easily toggle between the two.
And for the inference algorithms
maybe in this one there is.
Or I mean if you want to add one I
guess.
Yeah, yeah. I can comment on that. So
I'm actually at the moment halfway
through trying to get the renormalized
generative model
stuff into a notebook
and the active parameter learning is
something that we don't currently have a
good implementation of in PiMDP itself.
So Carl has done some
very specific stuff with that. So
my first attempt at this is going to be
have that defined in the notebook
effectively as like a little module that
we can like PiMDP agent plus this new
learning algorithm this is how you would
do that. But my long term goal is once
it's actually there to then put it in
the main thing. So
I think that modularity of it works
quite nicely. I will like we'll chat
with the rest of the team on
how much of the stuff we want to support
ourselves as part of the PiMDP API. So
like once cuz once an algorithm is there
we want everyone to use it and rely on
it and that it's not going to just
disappear. So that nuisance burden is
something that we need to be careful of
because this field is moving so quickly.
If we put every single new algorithm in
this then it's going to explode. But if
we focus on the modularity then you can
have the core we maintain the core as
like almost like a standard library and
then everyone else can bring their own
implementations if they so wish. And I
think that's quite a nice sweet spot to
be on in terms of us providing the
infrastructure for doing active
inference. But it allows particularly
like users who are going to range quite
widely from
you know sort of PhD students who are
doing they want to
simulate an agent that's
doing you know some sort of cognitive
psychology experiment and you know it's
maybe it's small scale but you know
they're trying to show an interesting
problem or maybe this disease affects
this type of planning or parameter
estimation etc. Compared to somebody
who's like I want an active inference
classifier that's like I don't care how
the brain works I just want this to run
at some speed on production.
Um because we want to support a huge
range of users it's better that we just
provide the skeleton and then everyone
else provides what they need in order to
achieve their goal. Um so the modularity
is absolutely key for that.
Um but yeah the more we can show people
how to use that the better. So uh yeah
watch this space basically.
I think there are exactly three groups
of people active inference caters to one
is the AI people who just want it to
run.
One is the theoretical people who want
to simulate some proof of principle of
for what some
and then there's the applied modelers
who want to fit it to behavioral data.
And you're right that the
the needs of those three groups are
different.
So it's so yeah.
We had the same design philosophy of
like
build the skeleton make it very easy to
plug in a user made bit or switch out
bits and pieces and then
the standard ones
put them as a standard library where you
can get them from something like that. I
think that's
something nice.
Um
on that on that note of like the
modularity. So one of the things we've
discussed I think in an issue somewhere
but it's not currently implemented is
the idea of
instead of
having like flags in the agent class
um that are saying oh am I use MMP or
VMP or exact
as you add more and more algorithms
that's going to be really ugly cuz
you're just going to have like flags for
every sub case. So one of the things
that we started to explore also with
this rollout function is the idea of
either passing in something like an
inference configuration
that could be basically the parameters
for some callable that does your hidden
state inference and then that way you
can just pass both the call like a a
pointer to the callable in from outside
like my my favorite inference algorithm
and then the parameters like the
configuration to that and then when you
get to that
inference step which like you said Arun
is just kind of the the skeleton
infrastructure that we provide then your
particular JAX compatible callable gets
used to actually perform the hidden
state inference. And so we kind of have
that with this idea. So for when you're
using the rollout the policy search
argument is sort of exactly that idea.
You actually just pass in
a callable which is some custom policy
search routine. So you don't have to use
the exhaustive tree search you don't
have to use a sophisticated inference
you could actually pass in your own
domain specific or custom
policy search function. So there is a
world where we just expand that sort of
pattern to inference learning all these
different
sub models.
Maybe also exciting to talk because we
were trying to do that with the Julia
package and it might be nice to align
that a bit like cuz I think even the I
suppose if
if you took that far enough it would
mean that you could use much of your
skeleton with an entirely different type
of generative model.
Yeah. As long as you have an inference
procedure that works with it right?
Even a sampler or something like that.
Yeah definitely.
Cuz then you can do maybe continuous
state space
stuff as long as you have some inference
that works for it.
I don't know. Want to share my
excitement maybe about that
idea. Yeah, yeah. That's something I've
thought about as well. It's like cuz you
could just yeah the the big problem with
the continuous state space as you know
is that defining the expected free
energy is a bit trickier.
So you need to use probably sampling to
ex compute those information gains.
If you say have a Gaussian mixture
likelihood or like a Gaussian likelihood
where you have one Gaussian component
per hidden state then to evaluate the
info gain of those rollouts you need to
use some kind of sampling or
approximation. But if you if you make
everything really
high level and abstract then there's
nothing stopping you from doing that. So
just in your policy search function you
have some step that computes a bunch of
samples to compute some you know
conditional entropies or whatever.
Exciting.
So I have other questions but maybe I'll
for a moment if
all of you or Dimitri or Arun had your
hand raised earlier and stuff.
I did have a question for you Connor
which is so
first of all I'll say congratulations on
getting us to V1. That's huge.
What do you think is missing for future
releases? What are you excited to work
on?
Yeah that's a great question.
Yeah there's there's there's various
one-off features that we just don't have
like these things with sampling
based schemes for estimating info gains
in continuous spaces.
So that I think would be the biggest
thing is getting the continuous
distribution front end in there.
So yeah this I mean this I've gone back
and forth on this because sometimes I
think to myself it's a bit out of scope
for PiMDP. PiMDP is very kind of wedded
to the SPM inspired discrete state space
models only. But one of the biggest
blockers for people actually using PiMDP
is the fact the scalability issues. Like
I'm not I'm not going to encode my image
in a bunch of discrete one hot vectors.
I mean the RGM thing is like one
solution to that but another solution is
you just have more flexible
distributions over your input variables.
So part of me is like maybe that's the
burden for another package and then you
can just tie up your like something like
RXInfer which does deal with continuous
distributions right? It deals with all
basically conjugate exponential family
and I guess more now.
So you could just link deal with that
for continuous stuff and deal with PiMDP
for discrete planning. But I also would
just be personally excited to work on
that because I think it would be really
cool to have PiMDP agents that can do
planning in like a Gaussian space. You
can kind of now do that because of the
modularity and because of the
differentiability. So you could hook up
instead of a neural network as this
front end I was hearing you could hook
up say a backward message from a
Gaussian distribution right? There's
nothing really stopping you from already
hooking up continuous stuff. So anyway
but I think that would be a big one to
work on.
Another one would be just to rigorously
characterize and optimize not the
sophisticated inference implementation
which is really good but also all the
hyper parameters. The sophisticated
inference has loads and loads of hyper
parameters which I don't fully
understand and I think even the
developers of sophisticated inference
still don't know the the space of hyper
parameters that gives you good
performance of sophisticated inference
in particular regimes. So, that's
something that I want to get better
characterization of. So, maybe some way
of given a planning problem in a
generative model, automatically
determining the best hyper parameter set
for
uh sophisticated inference.
Um another thing I think would be really
cool would to be I don't know. This is
more for pedagogy and like interactive
visualization, but some kind of like
POMDP server where you can actually
that's like hosting inference and
visualization. So, you can like upload
like an environment or an agent
configuration and then get in real time
like an interactive visualization uh of
your agent
um
interacting in that environment. Just as
an intuition pump for people who want to
say, "Okay, what if I change this? What
if I change this?"
That would break the ability to jit the
entire interaction loop because you'd be
a human human user giving input into the
system, but you could still get the
single time step rendering incredibly
fast because of how efficient POMDP is.
So, that would be cool, but that would
also require some resources for actually
hosting inference on some kind of
server.
Um yeah.
Can I just come in with on a couple of
those? So, I think um yeah, your your
first point on
just the flexibility of inputs that we
can give to a POMDP P agent is
exactly that, right? Like the more the
wider that scope, the more users we can
we can help. Uh I think that's that's a
really good point. Whether this should
be a separate package or in POMDP, a
nice middle ground might just be
notebooks. Just show, "This is how you
can do it."
But we don't necessarily have to support
that in perpetuity. And I think that's a
really good nice way of just basically
having
a garden with a thousand flowers bloom,
and then we can see what the community
uses, and if we then think, "Okay, this
is something that everybody wants to
use, and we are happy to support it,
happy to maintain it." Then we can shift
that into standard POMDP, but we don't
have to.
Um
I think that's one thing that I'm really
excited for for the next I'd say like 12
months, 24 months, is to see how people
use what we currently have.
Yeah. Looking at the issues that are
raised, what are people requesting, what
are people what are people not using,
and then going, "Right, okay, we can
either break and change deprecate some
stuff, but also like if there's stuff
that's really important that people
really value, then we can support that
and maintain that and make sure that
everybody's working from like a standard
base. And then that makes it much easier
for somebody like a PhD student who
doesn't have a lot of training to just
get up and running quickly, or software
engineer who doesn't necessarily
understand all of the maths behind
active inference to go, "Yeah, okay, I
can just use sophisticated inference out
of the box with sensible defaults." And
as you say, the hyper parameter space
already having been somewhat tuned
to get at least decent performance, if
not optimal performance across all
regimes.
Uh that does lead onto the second point
on the hyper parameter stuff. This is
something that also, I'll be honest,
highly confuses me.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
It's an absolute zoo of etas and Greek
letters just going, "Yeah, this is 512.
Deal with it." Yeah.
And I think that's I whenever I have
like sort of
sort of prodded um the people who know
better than me about this, uh the answer
I tend to get is, "Oh yeah, just wrap it
in a loop, cook uh calculate your
negative free energy over your hyper
parameter space, and then you just pick
the best one, right?"
>> Mhm. And that is both
I think a good answer and a bad answer
because that's a lot of work for a user
to do. Expensive, yeah. And it's
expensive. I think POMDP getting as
efficient as it is gets you closer to
being able to do that without having to
go, "Right, I have my very toy example.
Let me set a CPU running for 2 weeks,
and I'll come back later."
Now we're actually getting closer to
that, but I still think it would be nice
to have
I don't know, informed priors maybe on
these hyper parameters a bit like I
think that there are going to be some
things where you're like, "You shouldn't
set this value to this." Or Yeah. if you
or if you're like if you have these
values, you are in this regime of this
type of agent. Yeah.
>> That sort of guidance in the docs could
probably get you 80% of the value for
20% of the effort without having to just
do exhaustive searching over a hyper
parameter space that you don't really
fully understand.
Yeah, absolutely. There there there I
think there's a lot that can't actually
be done a priori without actually having
to run those sweeps. Like for instance,
certain thresholds on when do you prune
branches, or when do you ignore certain
um branches in the planning tree because
the observation uh probability of those
particular modalities has dropped below
some threshold. A lot of that I think
can at least be approximated a priori
just given the structure of your A and B
tensors. So, like your B tensor kind of
sets some rate on the diffusion of
future probability, right? Like you can
just estimate that by just taking like
an exponential of the B matrix X steps
in the future, given some planning
horizon, and some B matrix, you can
basically estimate when certain noises
will drop below some threshold. And then
you could probably use that just at
least put yourself in the right range
for those hyper parameters.
Um so yeah, I I totally agree, and I
think there's actually pretty concrete
ways you could start to do that.
Yeah, Peter.
I I presume we have to stop in 10
minutes, right?
Oh yeah, that's right. It's uh 6:20. I
can stay a little longer, but yeah. Um
so maybe because I I have many
things to mention now, one tiny thing,
Dimitri.
So, I'm also making basically Julia
version of PyBefit.
And so maybe that's a good reason to
chat at some point, Dimitri.
Yes, and that would be great. I mean, I
I wanted to thank Connor for promoting
PyBefit.
And also to announce that
a place for a maintainer of the package
is open, right?
>> [laughter]
>> So, I don't want to like be that person
in the future, so
I I mean, I I haven't used it in a
while, and
it's probably right for some
improvements.
Um but yeah, uh
Uh that that's yeah, the state. So, I'm
also not that much in the field of
cognitive experimental cognitive
neuroscience anymore, so
Cognitive modeling is is the Exactly.
Whoever wants to use it should also
apply to for a maintainer position.
But And I I have to jump now, so sorry.
Uh yeah, but yeah, just write me an
email, Peter, and we can chat from now.
Okay. Yeah. Uh you got time. Thank you.
I'll see you around.
Thanks, Connor.
No. Um so maybe I'll I'll happen pinging
Dimitri,
and I'll I know Tanner has his hand
raised. And I was just thinking that
maybe because there's a lot of these
things like you said, the continuous
state space models, Connor,
we want to do, and we might use RXN
first as back end
for them, for example. But also the
discussions on the planning stuff and
hyper parameter like we're trying to
separate that into
what are really parameters of how to
prune a tree search, and what are
parameters of how to do
sophisticated inference, right? You can
you could do sophisticated inference not
in a tree search way, and you would need
that if you have a continuous action
space or continuous observation space
and stuff.
Mhm. I just had the thought, I don't
know if it's a good one,
but maybe it would be nice to do like a
regular
monthly active inference software
development
experience sharing meeting or something
like that. Mhm. Yeah.
Because I I think there's a lot to talk
about, and uh
I'm sure we have a lot to learn from
you, but but maybe the other way around,
and there's also the CPP people and the
SPM people.
>> [snorts]
>> I'm sure maybe I'm sure Carl would be
kind of we could even [clears throat]
make it a TMB
uh thing. All right, yeah.
Yeah, I'm definitely open to that. I
think that's a great idea.
Because I think one thing is to learn
from each other, and another thing is to
align the software tools a bit so that
they
use the same terminology, have the same
kind of document examples, um
link to each other, set up a shared
testing workflow where we make sure that
they do the same thing, for example.
These kind of things.
>> Yeah, validation, yeah, for sure.
So, I just wanted to put that out there
at least, and then I'll save the rest of
my list of questions for maybe for those
moments.
Yeah, that sounds like a great idea.
I mean, I know everyone's time is
limited,
right? So,
not intending to
grab time, but I just thought
maybe that would be useful.
Yeah, I'm definitely down with that.
Um I don't know who is next. Does anyone
know what the order
I'll just briefly ask the questions from
the live chat, and uh so, first question
was from Andrew Bashier asking about
basically what kinds of contributions
and how to um
offer contributions.
And then Ted VR asked about any advice
on updating old code from legacy POMDP.
Mhm. Both great questions.
Um so yeah, for the first one, the the
usual workflow is basically
uh GitHub issues. So, you raise an issue
if there's a problem like a bug.
And if you want to contribute to fixing
that bug, then that's just basically a
matter of having an open discussion in
one of those issues. So, this is kind of
how we did the 1.0.0 release. I don't
know if Rune if we ever had even like a
a meeting. We basically were just
asynchronously talking through GitHub.
So, GitHub issues is is one way just to
report specific like features, bug
fixes, things that you want to see
implemented, you want to implement
yourself.
Another way is um through discussions.
So, this is kind of how we
uh did the organization of the um 1.0.0
release. I think I closed that
discussion now, but basically we had a
discussion thread opened here where we
were
uh discussing how to go forward. So, you
could also start a discussion.
Um and in terms of like concrete like
how to contribute, I mean the the
easiest way is you fork the repo, like
the concrete way is you fork the repo,
and you open a pull request to um to
main. And then we you tag me or someone
else uh on the developer team uh as a
reviewer. Arun, for instance, is pretty
um good with with responding to reviews.
Thank you, Arun. And uh and then we'll
get we'll get uh reviewing it. Um in
terms of like coding conventions and
stuff, I haven't been that We haven't
been that like
um
rigorous, I would say, or or uh
standardized with like how to
particularly do a contribution, but just
pull request,
informative description in the pull
request, make sure the CI passes so like
the unit tests and stuff.
Um and then there's a bunch of automatic
stuff. Like, there's a linter, there's a
pre-commit hooks for the um
cleaning up the Jupyter notebook. So, a
lot of that stuff is kind of handled for
you.
Um and then the second question was
about Oh, yeah, the uh migration guide.
Yeah.
That's a great point. So, we have this
whole tutorial here. Think you can see
it on the screen
that is uh about exactly that question.
Like, if I used to have a bunch of code
in NumPy, how do I migrate it to JAX?
And if there's any feedback on this, if
like it's not clear like, "Oh, how do I
migrate this thing? This isn't covered
in the guide." Please raise an issue or
raise a discussion um and then we can
get that in there.
Uh but yeah, so basically it's it's
stepping through and describing all
these things I briefly mentioned in the
talk, which is
the kind of old NumPy version versus the
new JAX version columns, and then how to
actually do that, how to deal with the
new batch size parameter, which can be a
bit unintuitive at first.
Um yeah, so that that should hopefully
help with all those migration uh issues.
Uh whilst we quickly have time, can I
come in on the contribution uh aspect of
this? Yeah, yeah, go for it. Um I think
in this day and age it's worth
highlighting at the moment. First of
all, like everyone who's working on this
is doing this out of volunteering time,
their own free time. No one is being
paid for any of this. So, this is all
out of because we are interested and we
care and uh we want to be part of the
community and we want to contribute to
the community.
Uh it is very exciting if other people
want to also contribute to this as well,
and we welcome that. I would caution
though, please do not just get your
large language model Claude code coding
agent to just look at the pymdp repo,
generate issues, generate require pull
requests, all of this sort of stuff. Uh
I am very aware that already active
inference is a very difficult thing to
understand. There is enough cognitive
debt of people understanding what their
code is doing.
I do not want to put large language
models in the mix without very careful
control on what the code is doing. Um
and yeah, we're all doing this because
we're interested and we also want to
learn and we also want to understand
what the stuff is doing. Um so, please
if you are going to contribute, um by
all means use co- large language model
coding tools if you would like,
but use your brain first and foremost is
my general plea to the community. And if
we get just clearly, you know,
automated automatic AI slop, we will
reject it immediately.
But like, you know, a good a good pull
request is on
Sorry, I actually myself
A good pull request is something that a
human being can easily understand. So,
you know, like if it's 20,000 lines and
we can't tell what's going on, obviously
we're not going to accept that. So,
general best practices of software
engineering, please do apply. Small,
dedicated pull requests that do a one
clearly defined thing, one demonstrable
thing, ideally coming with unit tests as
well.
We love to see it.
Yeah, thanks, Arun.
Any last comments anyone wants to make?
Otherwise, this is um the tip of the
iceberg of the tip of the iceberg
because it's such a powerful
methodological advance.
And maybe we'll be able to revisit in
sort of scheduled meetings or in future
model streams like
a little bit of a review
example highlighting
different kinds of contributions that
people are making, different benchmarks.
There's just so many ways to to go with
it.
And um
if anyone has any extra or last comments
for this one,
please go for it.
Uh yeah, I just I I wanted to say thank
you, Daniel, for inviting me to um come
give this presentation. I really
appreciate it. Um and also thanks to
everyone who uh contributed to the
discussion and again to all the
developers of pymdp. It was really
pleasure to build this and now get the
chance to kind of
unveil it to the world to everyone here.
So, thanks.
Great. All right.
Good work. Till next time.
Thanks, everyone. Take care.

## skf3sOM-7WI

Hello and welcome everyone.
This is the Active Inference Institute.
It's November 15th, 2022, and we're in Model Stream 7.1.
We're going to be discussing PyMDP, a Python package for Active Inference in discrete state spaces.
We will all say hello, then we'll pass to Connor for a presentation.
Following the presentation, we'll have some discussion, take a look over PyMDP scripts,
take any questions that are coming up in the live chat.
So thanks to the authors for joining today and also to Jakob.
We'll just start by saying hello.
So I'm Daniel.
I'm a researcher in California, and I'm really excited to learn a little bit more about PyMDP
and see how Active Inference gets applied.
And I'll pass to Jakob.
Hi everyone, I'm Jakob.
I'm a student in the UK and also very excited to hear more about PyMDP and discuss the recent
developments and plans for future development.
I'll pass it to Daphne.
Hi, I'm Daphne.
I'm working here in London.
I used PyMDP a lot for work that I did with Connor on my master's thesis and also just work
that we've been doing since then.
So I definitely think it's a really, really great package.
And I'm happy that people are going to start using it more.
Excellent.
All right, Connor.
Thanks a lot for joining.
Take it away.
Great.
Thank you.
Thanks for the invite.
I'm glad that we arranged this.
It's like a nice opportunity to go on the live stream.
I've been on a few times now, so it's always nice to come back.
So I don't have a slide introducing myself, so I'll just say a quick sentence just about
who I am.
So I'm Connor.
I'm a PhD student in biology at the Max Planck Institute for Animal Behavior in Constance
in Germany.
And most of my work is about applying active inference and kind of the Bayesian lens on
cognitive science and complex systems, applying that to collective behavior, like collective
animal behavior.
But today I'll be talking about kind of one of my side PhD projects, which has been developing
this PyMDP package, which was very much a collaborative group effort with a bunch of people from the
active inference community.
So yeah, let's dive in.
So yeah, the paper, the package has actually been out for a while, and the paper came out
earlier this year.
And it's just, I want to begin by emphasizing that PyMDP is very much a work in progress.
Even though we released a paper and it's definitely like a usable standalone package, there's always
a ton to keep developing.
And towards the end of the presentation, I'll talk about some of those ongoing developments,
which are really exciting in my opinion, and will really open up the usage and extendability
of the package.
So basically, I mean, this is an active inference institute podcast or live stream.
So I don't have to spend too much time motivating, I don't think, active inference.
But in short, the PyMDP package is a Python package for simulating and running active inference
processes in discrete state spaces.
And the discrete state space case is a very well studied case, and very well characterized,
and it's been very popular in like models of decision making, like discrete decision making
and planning, and has seen a lot of application in the neurosciences as models of like discrete
decision making behavior in, for instance, humans or other animals.
So just I'll give a little outline of the presentation.
So first, I'll just introduce the team of people who have worked on PyMDP and were authors on the
paper.
But the actual effective team goes much larger than that, because there's a lot of people
who are developing or using it and contributing in their own ways that weren't actually co-authors
on the paper.
And then I'll discuss the motivation for the package.
I'll give a brief overview of active inference in discrete state spaces.
But as I mentioned, I think this is a really nice like venue to have this discussion about
PyMDP, because I don't think I need to go too deep into discussing what active inference
is.
So that'll save us some time to like get more into the depth of PyMDP.
I'll talk about the existing approaches to simulating active inference agents, like namely
in MATLAB using SPM and just kind of compare and contrast PyMDP with SPM and help us understand
like kind of where PyMDP is coming from in terms of its origins in SPM, really.
So then we'll talk about some of the features of PyMDP and its general package structure.
And then we'll dive into a few usage examples where I'll show some like outputs of simulated
agent behavior and then the code that accompanies that just to kind of demonstrate what the
general flow of PyMDP looks like.
And then at the end, I'll just discuss some of the future directions and ongoing active
branches, I guess, of PyMDP, their ongoing development efforts that I think will make PyMDP super exciting
and extendable to all kinds of new use cases.
So I'm really excited about that.
And as Daniel was saying, if at any point someone wants to butt in or has questions for clarification,
just feel free to let me know and we can kind of dwell on some points for longer.
Okay, so I'll start by introducing the team.
So the co-authors in the paper in addition to me were Barron Millage, Daphne Damekas, who is here today,
Brennan Klein, Carl Friston, Ian Cousin, and Alexander Chance.
So Carl and Ian are my co-PhD supervisors.
And Carl is the original progenitor of the MDP or discrete state space formulation of active inference in MATLAB.
So it's nice to kind of have his stamp of approval on our work here and his kind of co-sign on that.
And then just I think it's important to emphasize how critical everyone here is to the package.
And it wasn't really just I did do, I guess, most of the actual software development.
But the early stages of PymDP were really conversations between me, Brennan, and Alec back in 2019 or maybe even earlier,
just about the need for a Python package that does active inference.
And I think probably other people were having similar conversations around that time.
But it was because we all kind of came together that we're able to build this thing in not too long of a time.
I mean, more than two years.
And it could have probably been done faster if I was working full time on it.
But it was really fun to kind of watch the progression of this.
And then as Daphne said, she's actually one of the first people who really used active PymDP in her own master's thesis.
And not only that, but in a very ambitious application, which is like multi-agent collective behavior,
having a bunch of PymDP agents interacting with each other to simulate the kind of opinion dynamics and echo chambers and social networks, which is really exciting.
So that was really gratifying to work with her on that.
And yeah, so it's really nice also that Daphne is part of this because it's like a very good example of a pioneer in the PymDP active inference community.
And then Barron also, me, Alec, and Barron did a lot of work on developing some of the more sophisticated message passing techniques in active inference in PymDP.
And Barron was also really critical in helping me write the paper.
And he's just great at writing and conceptualization and just was also used actually PymDP in some of his own work on successor representations in active inference, which is kind of cool.
Okay, so motivation.
One of the biggest things which everyone here is, I'm well aware of, is there's just much more popularity and interest in active inference these days in the past 10 years and especially the last five years.
So it's kind of obvious that we need some more general user-friendly frameworks for actually letting people learn about active inference, first of all, from a pedagogical perspective, as well as applying it in their own research or industrial applications or whatever they want to actually do with active inference.
And there's a lot especially of interest in active inference from certain communities, not just neuroscience anymore, but things like machine learning, data science, engineering, network science, even software development, software engineers.
And a lot of those interested fields, the most dominant language is Python.
So when a lot of times what I've heard is when people come to learn about active inference and they have a background in Python or R or something and they figure out that it's all in MATLAB, there's kind of a barrier to entry because they either don't know MATLAB or they have a hard time parsing MATLAB code, especially if they're from like non-array programming frameworks.
Like maybe they're a front end web developer who uses JavaScript or something and they're not actually familiar with like big multi-dimensional array programming.
So that was another motivation for making specifically a Python package that does active inference.
And then finally, because it's in Python, that means that we're now creating an ecosystem that can talk to other ecosystems.
So ideally, Pymdp isn't going to be just used in a script that only uses Pymdp.
It's going to be used with other software packages, some of them having to do with artificial intelligence or network science or all kinds of frameworks that are relevant.
And so you can now kind of plug and play with Pymdp agents and put them in environments like OpenAI Gym for reinforcement learning, for instance.
And now you can work with active inference in diverse applications.
And that's really great for Python because Python, by design and by its community-driven development, just has so many different packages that were built very well for some specific thing.
So now that it's in Python, you can kind of use it in tandem with all those other Python packages.
Okay, so now a brief intro to active inference.
So the fundamental paradigm of active inference is that you consider an agent embedded in its environment.
And unlike kind of traditional, more passive approaches to perception and behavior where you kind of consider the environment gives you information, you do some sensory motor transformation, and then you perform an action.
Active inference very much emphasizes the fact that inference or the problem of dealing with uncertainty characterizes both perception or what we call like state estimation or belief updating, as well as action, which is where the active inference part comes into play.
So agents are not only updating their beliefs about the states of the world, the hidden states out there, by minimizing this bound on surprise called free energy.
And that's where these kind of Helmholtzian ideas of perception as inference come from.
But also you're minimizing surprise or a bound on surprise also to choose your actions.
So inferring actions becomes just another sort of inference problem.
So policies or sequences of actions are considered latent variables or hidden states.
And then you also do inference about those.
And by casting both sides of the perception action coin as an example of surprise minimization, what you events are agents that kind of display purposeful and curious behavior.
And there's very, like, there's nothing about active inference that means you have to use discrete state spaces or PIMDP.
That's just one particular type of or class of generative models for active inference.
But the PIMDP discrete state space generative models are really easy to work with active inference because a lot of these quantities that I'm showing here are very easy to compute when you're dealing with PIMDPs or partially observed Markov decision processes.
So we'll get into all the mathematics in a little bit.
But that's just the basic paradigm of active inference.
Agent and environment trying to minimize surprise, both doing perception and action by minimizing surprise.
And just for a more in-depth mathematical review of active inference in discrete state spaces, namely using these partially observed Markov decision processes, I would recommend reading this paper, which is excellent in the Journal of Mathematical Psychology by Lance, Thomas, Noor, Sebastian, Victorita, and Carl.
It's just a really great description from a formal basis of how we get to the update equations for active inference, starting from the most, like, formal treatment of categorical and Dirichlet distributions.
And also the PIMDP paper, the version we have on archive also has a bunch of appendices that do a lot of the similar sort of math.
So I would also refer people to that.
Okay, so now let's get into the generative models that form the bread and butter of the agent's brains in PIMDP, essentially.
So central to active inference is writing down a generative model, which is just a specification of how an agent believes its world works.
How does its environment, how does it believe its environment influences itself, like the dynamics of the world progress?
And how does that, those hidden state dynamics also give rise to observations?
That's all encoded in what we call a generative model or a world model, some people also call it.
So in PIMDP, we only deal with a very specific sort of generative model, which are called these partially observed Markov decision processes.
So these are a classic model of sequential decision making and planning under uncertainty.
They're not unique to active inference.
People use POMDP models for classical reinforcement learning and all kinds of decision making problems.
They're called Markovian, Markov decision process, because the state at the current time only depends on the action in the state at the previous time.
So that's the definition of a Markov process.
They kind of have this shallow temporal dependence that, for instance, a non-Markovian process doesn't have, like a process that has longer term or deeper temporal dependencies that stretch further back in the past.
POMDPs are often but not always formula in discrete state space and discrete time.
There's nothing about the word POMDP that means they have to be these multinomial or categorical distributions.
But just when we talk about POMDPs and active inference, we're almost always talking about these discrete ones that have to do with, basically, you can only be in one of K discrete states at a time and you only progress to one of K discrete states at the next time.
So everything is discrete, but there's nothing intrinsically about these Markov decision processes that has to be discrete.
I think it's just worth mentioning that because that's an important kind of conflation that people often make when they see the word POMDP.
And the reason we decided to use this discrete POMDP generative model for active inference is not just because of the applications to sequential decision making and planning, but also there's just a massive pre-existing active inference literature since 2010, 2011 on using POMDPs as generative models for decision making tests.
So all the mathematics for doing active inference with these models is already done.
So we didn't have to invent any new math or theory to actually code this up because a lot of it has already been written in papers for like 10 years.
So that made our life easier when developing it.
So now let's dive into just the main components of these POMDPs.
I'm only listing the four major ones here, but there's other components that we can discuss if anyone's interested.
But essentially this line at the top is a description of the generative model in terms of a joint distribution over hidden states S and observations O into the future.
So because of the Markovian nature of this generative model, you can write the joint distribution with this factorized basically product of priors and likelihoods that factorizes across time.
So that's why there are those products over time in the top, but it doesn't matter understanding the math right now.
But the main components, which we'll map onto a schematic in a second, are the agent's beliefs about how the hidden states cause observations, which we encode in something called the observation model or the likelihood mapping, often called the A matrix or the A array.
So this is a probabilistic representation of how do hidden states at the current time affect or give rise to observations at the current time.
Second, we have the transition or dynamics model, which is another sort of likelihood that encodes the agent's beliefs about how hidden states at one time relate to hidden states at the next time.
So this maps, this is what the agent uses to make forward predictions about how will the world evolve if this happens or if that happens, as well as to carry kind of messages or empirical priors from the past.
Given where I was yesterday, where must I be now, given my beliefs about how the world evolves in time.
That's all encoded in the B array or the B matrix.
And then these final two are kind of priors.
The first of which is very important, which is called the C array or the C vector, which encodes the agent's prior beliefs about what observations it's likely to encounter.
And as we said in the beginning, active inference is all about casting both action and perception as an inference problem.
So active inference as a framework kind of turns the classic paradigm of reward functions and reinforcement learning on its head by saying, instead of a reward function, just equip the agent with a kind of optimistic belief that in the future, I will see this kind of data.
And then by performing inference with respect to a generative model that has that prior belief in it, the agent will look like it's searching for observations that conform with its priors.
So this goes in line with this idea that active inference is a process of self-fulfilling prophecy.
The agent believes I'm more or less likely to see certain observations.
And then by doing inference about policies with such a bias to generative model, the agent will kind of bring itself to actually realize its prior preferences or these prior beliefs about observations.
So that's all encoded in the C vector.
The first time step of the simulation.
So this isn't really a necessary thing in active inference, but oftentimes when we're simulating agents, we use a finite temporal horizon with a start time and an end time.
So if you have a finite temporal horizon, it means that you have to basically plug in a prior belief about what the world looks like at time step one.
And that prior belief is encoded in this D vector.
And we can just intuitively sketch out the POMDP generative model as a Bayesian graph where nodes are connected by edges, by these arrows if they depend on each other.
So these red nodes represent the hidden states transitioning to each other over time.
And the blue nodes, the O nodes represent the agent's beliefs about how observations are generated from those hidden states.
So that's just a graphical representation of the POMDP.
And the A matrix encodes, as we said, the agent's beliefs about how those red nodes give rise to the blue nodes at any time.
So usually we assume that this A matrix is time invariant.
So they believe that this observation mapping doesn't itself depend on time.
That's at least the assumption made in most POMDPs.
And then there's also the agent's time invariant beliefs about how the transition dynamics of the world bring states at time t minus one to states at time t.
And then policy selection or action comes into play in active inference by framing actions as controlled transitions.
So the B matrix does not just say how should the world look now given how it was yesterday, but how should it look now given how it was yesterday and the fact that I took this action at time t minus one.
So the B matrix is not only conditioned on past states, but also on previous actions.
So policies pi come into play as a belief or a distribution over those actions.
So the actions directly influence the transitions and then the transitions affect the states.
So that's how kind of we think about action in a lot of POMDP scenarios.
And actions or policies pi are sequences of actions or collections of actions.
And then we have this critical objective function called the expected free energy that determines which actions are more likely than others.
So by minimizing expected free energy, we optimize a belief about policies.
And then the expected free energy itself is a function of your generative model, your beliefs about the world, which includes this biased prior belief about what observations you expect yourself to see.
So the kind of reward function enters policy selection via this expected free energy.
And that's why we're able to still kind of call all of this a form of an inference problem because we're minimizing this expected bound on surprise.
So and in doing so, we kind of infer distribution of our policies, which we then sample from to actually generate actions and change the world.
And then as I said, the D vector is basically just a prior on that initial hidden state distribution.
So yeah, in summary, to build a POMDP active inference model, you have to write down or encode these A, B, Cs, and Ds.
And there's some other priors too that we can talk about, like a prior over policies, which is called an E vector.
But for now, you can just think of most of the heavy lifting in active inference as consisting in writing these things down, actually encoding what your agent believes about the world that it exists in.
And these things in the case of these categorical discrete distributions, they end up looking like matrices and vectors.
Since everything is categorical distributions, you're not dealing with continuous infinite dimensional spaces.
You're dealing with things that have a discrete number of entries, like a 4x4 matrix or 5x5 matrix.
Yeah, I think before we...
Yeah, so the next part I'm going to talk about, like the MATLAB Python dialectic.
Before we move on to that, though, should we maybe pause if there's any questions?
Yeah, great.
Thank you.
Daphne or Jakob, do you want to provide any thoughts or reflections?
There's one thing that I've always been a little bit confused about, which might be nice to resolve now, which is in the parameterization of the prior preferences.
Can you explain, like, why exactly it is that when you initialize them, you just do them with, like, integers greater than or equal to 1, but then you, like, softmax them later on when you actually use an inference?
Like, why do we not define our prior preferences as probabilities?
Yeah, that's a good point and a good thing to mention.
So, usually in both the MATLAB and the Python implementation, so when building PyMDP, we made the decision to do the same thing.
When you're encoding that C vector, instead of encoding it as probabilities, which it ultimately should be, what you really write down is the log of the C vector.
So, you write it down in terms of relative log probabilities.
And the reason that's potentially a more intuitive parameterization rather than writing it down directly in terms of probabilities is because the log of the probability is more like the actual reward.
So, if we go back to this generative model, the expected free energy being a free energy is actually, and a free energy is sort of a kind of KL divergence.
It's encoded in terms of bits, which is naturally in a logarithmic space.
So, if you're writing down like a prior in terms of in log space, you know kind of if I change the number of log units in my prior preferences, it's more linearly related to the change in the expected free energy for a policy that leads to that observation.
Whereas if you're writing down the priors in terms of probability space, the resulting change in the expected free energy from changing something in probability space is not going to be linear.
It's going to be a nonlinear change.
So, if we think of rewards as log probabilities, something that's like one extra log unit or one natural log, one nat, or one bit more valuable than another thing, that will actually reflect itself in terms of the expected free energy difference between seeing thing one versus thing two.
Whereas if we encode those two things in terms of probabilities, that expected free energy difference won't be as intuitive simply because it won't be linear.
So, that's like a quick reason for why we decide to encode things in log space.
But there's nothing mathematically necessary by any means.
You could easily just write the priors directly in terms of probabilities.
It's more of a, it's like a, it's just a way to make it more reward-like, really.
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
Thanks.
Thanks, Jakob.
Yeah, I'm wondering.
Is there a requirement on the A and B matrices or tensors to be actually encoded as categorical matrices?
Or, because thinking about like the function of the A matrix and the way the agent uses it to infer its hidden state from an observation,
I'm thinking whether it would be possible to encode high-dimensional state spaces in something like a neural network that can approximate these probabilistic representations as well,
and learn the representation, the relationship between observations and hidden states.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah, so basically...
Sorry.
There might be a like, but yeah, basically whether you think that would be possible.
Because I feel like the Python implementation, which I'm sure you'll get into the advantages of Python over MATLAB,
also affords the interoperability with other libraries and within data science.
Totally, yeah.

Mm-hmm.
Totally, yeah.
That's a great point.
So I kind of mentioned towards the beginning when we talked about POMDPs, there's nothing about POMDPs that means all these things have to be matrices.
The main thing that defines a POMDP is that it's partially observable so that the agent only gets to see the blue nodes,
and that it's a Markovian process so that there's like a temporal shallowness in the memory of the hidden states.
But you could replace A and B with any kind of parameterized...
It has to be a proper likelihood function, so it has to have the properties of being a likelihood.
There's nothing that means that it can't be a multivariate Gaussian or a Cauchy distribution or a Bernoulli distribution or...
Yeah, any kind of exponential family or some like parametrized neural network like that people use oftentimes in reinforcement learning.
Like they'll parametrize a dynamics model just with a bunch of neural networks that say take time...
State at time t and move them to state at time t plus one.
The reason there's difficulties with that is simply because it's unclear how to compute things like the expected free energy once you start moving into these not as nicely behaved distributions.
So a lot of the reason that this framework was developed in the discrete categorical state version is not only because for modeling low dimensional tasks like someone playing a slot machine or deciding to go left or right in a Y maze.
It's easy to use these discrete distributions to kind of give a good description of that behavior.
That's one thing. But also is literally a mathematical tractability reason.
There aren't always closed form solutions for the expected free energy depending on what those distributions look like.
So there's some work on doing this. For instance, Magnus Kudel has a paper in Entropy where they compute the expected free energy in linear dynamical systems, basically where all these A's and B's are represented by Gaussians.
So they call this like a linear controllable dynamical system.
And they also have to make some assumptions about how the actions affect the B matrix, which really isn't a matrix anymore.
It's more like a continuous Gaussian.
And they find that the normal terms you get with the expected free energy, like the information gain, those a lot of the interesting things that we get with when we use categorical distributions, those terms actually disappear when we use Gaussian.
So you actually don't get the nice like information gain seeking or information seeking terms that you would normally get by using categoricals.
But there's other ways to get around that. Like if you use neural networks, you can still use things like sampling approaches to compute expected free energies, where you basically like sample a bunch of possible trajectories.
And then you can use the samples like kind of Monte Carlo style to compute expected free energies.
And a lot of the groups that have done like scaling active inference to deep neural networks, they've used that kind of approach.
So like Alec Chance's paper Scaling Active Inference does stuff like that. A lot of the stuff out of like Tim Verbalen's group.
I don't want to leave anyone out. I think like in NOR has done obviously a lot of, NOR Sagita has done a lot of active inference with deep neural networks.
As a FIRO's found to us, like a lot of these people were actually trying to apply active inference to deep neural nets.
They have to basically come up with ways to compute that expected free energy that are different than the way it's done in PI MDP.
Because in PI MDP, you can exactly compute that expected free energy, which ends up just being a bunch of matrix vector products and then a summation.
So it just becomes more difficult when you use more complex distributions, but it's by no means impossible.
You just have to, you have to come up with some kind of approximation.
But there are ways I think you can get around that, which involve what people have been calling hybrid models, where you might have deep neural networks that feed into a POMDP at like some higher layer.
And then in POMDP space, like a discrete categorical space, you can still compute expected free energies and free energies.
But you can still take advantage of at lower levels, like high dimensional neural networks to project your data into this low dimensional space.
So you do all the EFE active inference in this lower dimensional POMDP space where everything's exact.
But you can still take advantage of the nice dimensionality reduction and feature extraction properties of neural networks to first like pre-process the observations.
So that's something I'll talk about at the end, because we've made some progress on the first steps towards making that possible, which involves basically making all of POMDP auto differentiable so you can like train neural networks that are attached to POMDP models.
Yeah, it's a great question though.
Awesome. I see this as like the body plan of generative models.
And maybe what's a leg today is an antenna tomorrow or the leg gets longer or thicker.
There's a lot of different ways to swap out and compose different parts of the model.
So thanks. Carry on.
Cool. Yeah.
So yeah, now let's talk a little bit about the traditional software for active inference research, which I'm sure everyone on the call right now is familiar with.
The original way it was done was basically Carl Friston and a few others wrote a bunch of MATLAB scripts, part of the SPM package,
which is originally developed for like neuroimaging data analysis and statistical testing.
And there's a sub package called DEM or dynamical expectation maximization, which is used for not only active inference, including continuous active inference, but also just like generalized filtering and fitting nonlinear state space models from empirical data.
So within that we have all the, this kind of discrete active inference toolbox.
Most of the functions of which are prefixed by SPM underscore MDP.
So the main function that basically does everything that PYMDP does for the most part is, is containing one function called SPM MDP VBX.
And kind of in a tongue in cheek way, we often joked around that PYMDP is just a package that implements that one function, because that one function essentially does active inference and learning and all the message passing just in, in one call, which in many ways is very nice because you just have to pass in a PYMDP to it.
And then it, in a kind of black box way, gives you all the belief updating and history of actions and everything that, that you need.
There are, despite its elegance and it's like usefulness and how robust it actually is, because you can pass in any agent with any generative model and it'll pretty much work.
The issue is because it's just a single function, it's not very modular.
So it's very hard to flexibly compose different subcomputations of an active inference process.
So if you want to do some bespoke active inference application, where like, oh, before I do hidden state inference, I want to update the parameters of the A matrix and I want to do it in this particular way.
It's very hard to do that in SPM, MDP, VBX.
So what often I see happening, and I did this myself in my master's research is I ended up having like five different versions of this function that have some little like specialist prefix for the specific thing that I was doing.
And then that just ends up being like kind of not efficient because you're creating a bunch of boilerplate code and then you have one function that does the particular little version of active inference that you want to explore in your project.
So just by modularizing this one function, even within MATLAB, you could do this.
You would basically make the thing a lot more flexible and save a lot of copying and pasting of code.
Another issue is that inference and policy selection of fixed.
So you can't kind of compare and contrast different message passing approaches and action selection routines.
So there's just one way it's done in SPM, MDP, VBX, which is called marginal message passing.
And so it's hard to like compare that.
Like what if you change the message passing algorithm?
Whereas in PIMBP, we have it right now to message passing algorithms that you can kind of side by side compare.
And then we hope to add more in the future, which is very easy because it's just a modular thing.
And then because of what we were talking about in the beginning with it, just by virtue of this being in MATLAB, it's harder to synthesize with other frameworks like in reinforcement learning,
OpenAI gym and deep neural networks like in TensorFlow or PyTorch or JAX.
So just the fact that it's in MATLAB already limits it.
Of course, people have found ways to do like cross language, cross platform code, like moving from Julia to MATLAB to Python and back.
But it's just a lot, a lot more heavy lifting involved in that.
And then I'll just lay out some kind of pros and cons of MATLAB and Python.
So one of the things I do like about MATLAB is it's very easy to get started with array programming, has a nice editor.
There's a lot of use and history in computational neuroscience.
Like even when I gave this tutorial at a course on computational psychiatry this past year, I think the majority of the tutorials were still using MATLAB.
So there's still a good reason to use MATLAB just because of the history and the number of packages that are well suited for doing neuroscience and psychophysics stuff.
So there's that advantage, just kind of like almost momentum or legacy advantage.
But of course, there's issues like as proprietary.
I think that's the biggest one you need to pay one way or another to to use MATLAB.
And there's not as much community driven development.
I mean, there is some like the file exchange, but it's not the same level as something like Python.
And then Python kind of can compete with MATLAB because it has array programming in the form of NumPy.
Of course, it's open source.
It's been widespread adopted across tons of fields, not just academic ones, but lots of commercial application.
And there's a lot of community driven development in the form of packages like PyMEP.
But one disadvantage is for me, at least it wasn't as easy to get started with MATLAB as it was with MATLAB because you often have to like install a bunch of things and learn about virtual environments.
And you have to like learn about a lot of more programming stuff before getting started with using Python.
So I think that is one reason that MATLAB is actually still useful as a pedagogical tool like the time between getting MATLAB and actually doing programming is pretty short, which is nice.
So yeah, the package is called it's within this infer actively GitHub organization is called PyMEP.
And you can just pip install it like in a virtual environment or just in your base installation of Python.
And then once you have a PyMEP installed, you can kind of import and use in a flexible modular way, all the different sub packages or sub modules like the agent module, which basically just implements the agent class.
And then there's different modules like inference and control and learning that are independent of actually an active inference agent.
And you can just use them to do message passing for hidden state inference or to compute expected free energies on possible policies or to compute updates to parameters.
So all those things can be composed and flexibly kind of you can make kind of Frankenstein active inference agents by composing all these things in the bespoke way that you desire.
And a lot of it, the main workflow of PyMEP comes down to specifying the generative model in the forms of these discrete arrays and then plugging them into the brain of the agent and instantiating an agent.
So that is pretty much encapsulated by these two lines at the bottom, import the agent from PyMEP.
And then you just build one by plugging in the A, B, Cs, and Ds.
And then you have this agent object that you can use to do hidden state inference through methods like infer states, infer policies, which is the agent internally computes the expected free energy of its policies.
And then you finally can sample actions.
So these three lines are the kind of the main players of any active inference loop, state inference, policy inference, and then action selection.
And you just kind of tie those in a loop over time to instantiate an active inference process.
And the kind of the circularity of the action perception loop comes into play with the inputs to the agent, which are its observations, and the outputs of its action selection, which are its actions.
And of course, you need to use the last action to then get a new observation and that you do by plugging the action into some environment.
This is also in the active inference literature often referred to as the generative process.
So the actual world out there that generates your data.
So this is the kind of classic action perception loop you'll see in any active inference agent.
And this is also not even unique to active inference.
This is just how reinforcement learning problems are generically framed.
So like OpenAI-Igm uses a very similar control flow or kind of like, yeah, sensory motor loop.
So yeah, here's an example of just doing that, like import the agent, set up the generative model,
and that's the hardest part.
So I kind of conveniently put ellipses after the dot dot dot, but that's actually where most of the code is going to happen is building the generative model.
Build the agent, you build some environment, which you can either import as one of the stored PINDP environments,
or you could get it from OpenAI-Gym, or you could just create your own environment.
So this would be your code that actually describes how the world works out there, the world that the agent is interacting with.
And then you can implement a timestep of active inference with those few lines of code right there.
And that would all be kind of those last lines, like eight through 15, those would kind of be wrapped within a loop over time.
Yeah, this is just more examples of like, this would be a quick way to, in this example, we're not even running active inference, but we're just using one of the message passing algorithms from the ALGOS submodule to do hidden state inference.
So in this case, I just created a random A matrix, I created a random observation, and I gave, and I made up a random prior, and then I can just do one like fictive update of what an agent might be doing during hidden state inference and optimize QS, or the beliefs about hidden states.
So this is an example of how you could actually use PyMDP to just do generic inference on hidden Markov models.
You don't even need to use it within an active inference loop.
You could just use it to do like statistical inference on a hidden Markov model with the particular algorithms that we've provided.
And then of course, one of the advantages I talked about over the SPM is that you can create customized active inference processes.
There's a lot of like extra arguments to the agent class where you can kind of turn on and off different parts of the reward function or the expected free energy for an agent.
So for instance, in this agent, the agent does not incorporate expected utility, which is the kind of reward C vector driven component of action selection, but the agent does use state info gain and parameter information gain, which are two other components of the expected free energy.
So there's a lot of ways that you can kind of create a bespoke active inference agent that doesn't, that will behave in different ways depending on these kind of keyword arguments that you provide.
Yeah, here are just more examples.
Like in this case, we're using active inference agent just to do hidden state inference and no actions at all.
So the agent is just inferring hidden states. It's updating its beliefs about the A matrix and it's updating its beliefs about the D vector or the initial hidden state.
And so you can, you know, just flexibly put together all these lines and create an agent that does whatever you want.
It doesn't even need to be acting in the world technically.
Okay. So now I'm going to show a few examples of PIMDP in action.
So this is one that's a classic active inference paper. It's one of my favorite papers. It was, I think it's called scene construction and active inference where it's describing a task where an agent has to, and this was used to actually model human data in a psychophysics task.
An agent has to gaze contingently uncover two out of four quadrants that have particular images in them.
And there's four quadrants. And there's four quadrants total and two of them have the images of interest in them.
And if the two images in this case are a bird and a cat image, then that's an example of a flea scene.
So the agent basically, or the human has to categorize the latent scene, which is simply defined by the combination of two images, and then categorize the scene.
So it's basically a categorization task, but the agent needs to gaze contingently uncover a sequence of cues before it knows what that category is or what that scene is.
So it combines the epistemic components that we all know and love about active inference, trying to uncover the hidden state of the world by actively sampling it.
So in this case, they're sampling the world by moving their eyes to different quadrants to uncover what's behind them.
And then actually choosing what the true category is based on what it learned about the world.
And that's where it's trying to maximize utility because there's some reward associated with categorizing correctly.
So this is an example of that which was originally done in MATLAB and I just re-implemented in PyMVP.
And this is another example where now the scene is the feed scene.
So the cues are in the lower two quadrants in this example.
So the agent has to look around the different quadrants.
It finally sees that there's, okay, there's a bird in the lower right, seeds in the lower left.
So this must be the feed scene.
And just to show an example of what does that actually look like in active inference?
Like what does the code look like for that?
So the first thing you would do for this one is you would set up your agent, which again, you just throw in the A, B, Cs, and Ds.
In this case, I used a particular message passing algorithm called marginal message passing, which is the same one used in MATLAB.
You set up a policy depth and an inference horizon, which is kind of like a memory, like how much of the past observations you take into account.
And then you set up a environment.
This is like the external world that the agent will be interacting with.
In this case, I'm calling it the scene construction environment, which just tells me once the agent moves its eyes to a certain place, how does that action then determine what the agent sees next, which will be, you know, whatever is behind the quadrant that it decided to look at.
So those are the main two things. Those are the two sides of the action perception loop, the agent and the environment.
And then what it's often common to do is to get an initial observation by resetting the environment, which is a convention borrowed from OpenAI Gym.
You basically do environment.reset. It's like a method of the environment that spits out the initial observations.
And then it's often useful in these things to create like lists or dictionaries that have a mapping between the observation indices, which are like integers between zero and however many observations there are.
And then what those actually correspond to semantically.
So this is just a very common way to like, because all the POMDP and the environment will be spitting out or like ones and twos and zeros and all these like discrete indices, but it's useful to have these lists that you can use to kind of semantically map particular indices to things that are meaningful, like seeing the bird image or choosing the category one versus category two.
And then once you've done that, you just write a loop over time where you're basically performing active inference, which consists in hidden state estimation and policy inference.
So you sample an action, which then gets fed back into the environment to produce another observation.
And then that happens over time.
So that's the whole action perception.
So this is, yeah, so that's, it's deceptively simple how like short it looks, but I'm kind of glossing over something that I'll talk about later, which is, I mentioned earlier, which is as easy as this looks, the hardest part is actually done way before any of this happens, which is writing down the A, B, Cs, and Ds.
That's by far the most time intensive and like complex part of active inference is actually writing down the generative model.
Once you have the generative model written down, then the rest basically is like clockwork.
You just have to link the agent to the environment and then just run like five or six lines just to actually implement the thing.
But the hardest part is writing down those A, B, Cs, and Ds in the beginning.
I'll show another example, which I kind of call T-Maze on steroids.
So in the classic T-Maze task that I forgot what the original paper was, but it's something that's been very popular in the active inference literature for a while.
So in the last one, I think Carl came up with maybe in 2015 or earlier even, is you have an agent, a mouse that has to visit two potential sources of either reward or punishment in its environment.
And it doesn't know which arm of this T-Maze contains the reward.
So it has to visit a queue first before it knows which arm has the reward and which one has either no reward or like a shock, like a negative stimulus.
In this one, I just kind of spatially extended the T-Maze so the agent has to now visit a sequence of queues, each of which reveals the location of the next queue, in order to figure out the final queue, which is just the location of the cheese versus the shock.
So this is another example where the agent first goes to queue one, then it knows where queue two is, and then it knows where the cheese is.
So I call this epistemic chaining because the agent doesn't actually have to plan its root all the way to the final location of the cheese.
All it has to do is get to the next queue, which then reveals where the next queue is, which finally reveals where the hidden location of the reward is.
So you're kind of using epistemic value or curiosity to allow an otherwise temporally shallow animal to plan its way to a distal reward or something that it can't plan to get to a priori.
And again, this is just an example of what that would look like in PyMDP, where it basically looks exactly the same.
It's just that the environment and the generative model are different, but the general flow of the code is always has this kind of classic pipeline.
Okay, so now I'll get to the kind of most important part.
And I think the biggest source of confusion with active inference is that the hardest part is the generative model.
It's all the complexity comes into encoding the agent's beliefs about the world.
So how do I write down the A, Bs, and Cs, and Ds?
In paradigms like deep neural networks or like unsupervised learning, you don't have to write down the model.
The neural network learns the model by just observing loads and loads of data.
So it's less sample efficient, but you don't have to encode as much to begin with.
So this is kind of the kind of coincides with a larger divide between model-free and model-based approaches.
With deep neural networks, you're effectively issuing the sample, the statistical complexity of having to write down the model by just sticking together a bunch of nonlinear function approximators,
and then just learning the beliefs that the agent has about the world by just bombarding it with data.
The same thing goes for deep reinforcement learning, like deep Q learning.
In active inference, the agents are much more sample efficient,
in the sense that they don't need to train on like billions of data vectors.
But on the other hand, there's more investment on your end as the modeler,
because you have to write down explicitly what the agent's beliefs about the world are.
You don't just equip it with something as generic as a convolutional layer,
and some values and stuff, and then let it learn.
You actually have to hand code that.
I think this is one of the biggest differences between model-based reinforcement learning,
where you actually encode a Bayesian generative model of the world,
and kind of more model-free or data-driven approaches.
But there is, it's not such a dichotomy.
There are ways to kind of combine the two.
So just to kind of show that very specifically, for instance, in this scene construction demo
that I showed like a few slides ago, if you just look in terms of sheer lines of code,
which one took more code, you can kind of use the amount of lines of code as a proxy for statistical complexity,
or how much information is contained.
So the simulation itself running the active inference loop was like 15 lines of code,
just like, and that code itself is already very generic and not specific to the scene construction demo.
Writing the generative model itself, that's where all the heavy lifting is done.
That's where all the information that's specific to that task gets encoded.
So for instance, I just look at how I created the A matrix,
the beliefs about the observation mapping for the scene construction demo,
that already is like way more code than just running the entire active inference simulation.
So just like by the sheer amount of code, you can already tell,
oh yeah, there's a lot of assumptions and information that's being baked into the generative model.
And that's where most of the heavy lifting of active inference actually comes from.
Yeah, so I just think it's important to remark on that,
because that's like a really key thing that I think anyone who wants to start working with active inference models
and in discrete state spaces should kind of wrap their head around is that the model does most of the work for you.
The expected free energy, yes, is a very interesting objective function that has many advantages,
but most of the power of active inference comes into writing down what your agent's beliefs about the world are.
And then once you have that, then all of the rest kind of just does the work for you,
because the Pymdb code is very generic.
What's not generic is how you encode the beliefs about the world.
Okay, so now I'm kind of finishing up.
Maybe we should dwell just on that bit for a second.
Does anyone have thoughts or comments or questions about this?
If not, I can just proceed and finish off.
Daphne or Jakob or I'll ask one.
I don't have any questions.
All right, well, you've emphasized the specification of the agent generative model.
And how about the other side of the coin?
How do we specify a generative process?
How do we specify the environment for the agent?
That's a really good question.
Yeah, basically everything I said about the generative model kind of applies to the generative process as well,
except the agent's interesting behavior.
Yeah, I mean, you could think of the generative process as driving a lot of that too.
I guess the bottleneck is the generative model,
because if you create a really complex generative process,
so a really complex environment that has all kinds of fancy nonlinear dynamics,
but the agent's model of the world is super, super simple.
So it just believes that there's a light switch that's either on or off,
then the possible behavior you can get from such a simple agent is limited by the complexity of its generative model.
So a very simple generative model will still not show very interesting behavior,
even if it's embedded in a complex generative process.
But the most rich dynamics will obviously happen when you have both a complex generative process and a complex generative model.
So all the work in building the generative model, which I would say is the first line up here,
can also be matched by a lot of work in generating the generative process as well,
which in this case is this epistemic grid world environment,
which is just a set of rules that says,
when the agent is in the queue location, show them the queue identity.
Like this one is relatively simple.
But one interesting thing to think about,
and I'm sure like you, Daniel, have thought about this when it comes to,
you know, your work on active inference and collective behavior is,
the interesting thing about multi-agent behavior is in that case,
the generative process are the actions of other agents.
So the generative process, my generative process are actually the outputs of another active inference agent.
So that's one of the most complicated things and what Daphne and I had to grapple with when we were doing the,
and Mao as well.
Mao was the first author of the epistemic communities work,
this like social network echo chamber stuff.
In that context, the generative process is a little bit more difficult because the process itself is consisting of other active inference agents that are also acting.
So the control flow of that code will look a little bit different where you're going to have to loop over all agents,
get actions from them,
and then use those actions to parameterize the observations for all the other agents.
I mean, that's just a generic statement about multi-agent simulations in general,
but it's particularly interesting when you think about agents trying to model other agents,
because almost necessarily every active inference agent will have an impoverished model of how the world works,
when the way the world works is a bunch of interacting active inference agents.
So you're going to have to kind of necessarily equip each agent with a more simplified generative model,
unless you want them to all have like infinite recursion depth and be able to simulate in their own generative model,
the generative models of every other agent.
So yeah, that was kind of a tangent about the multi-agent case, but I think it's just an interesting complex to think about the tension between the generative model complexity
and the generative process complexity and how they kind of mutually constrain the behavior of each other.
Okay, shall I just proceed? So yeah, the last two slides I think is the kind of exciting stuff.
So here are a list of things that we'd like to do with PyMDP in the future.
I'll just go through them and then I'll dwell on a few that I think are the most important.
So one is fitting PyMDP models to empirical data.
So I've interacted a lot with people from the computational psychiatry community
who are interested in actually creating models of behavior, often human behavior, that are their POMDP active inference models.
And one of the biggest, I think, limitations of PyMDP right now is that people can't use PyMDP to infer the active inference parameters of like a human subject that's performing some task.
That's what you can do in SPM right now, but unfortunately you can't do that in PyMDP.
So this is like really high in the priorities list. I think this is what will help PyMDP actually become competitive to SPM for the communities that are interested in fitting PyMDP models to data.
So these are like kind of more empirical scientific disciplines like computational psychiatry.
Other things is I think we need better interfaces for actually generating and constructing generative models.
Right now, all that code involved in building A and B matrices, that really becomes the bottleneck for anyone trying to do active inference.
And in large part because constructing those arrays for complex generative models can be a real headache.
You have to do all this weird multi-dimensional indexing because like if you have like a bunch of different interacting variables in the world, you have to create massive multi-dimensional arrays that have different numbers of extra dimensions that correspond to all these possible contingencies in the world.
It kind of becomes a massive lookup table that you have to encode all the relationships between variables.
And so I think there might be, this is an ambitious project, but there might be ways to actually create kind of UIs like user interfaces that help people build generative models by like asking them a sequence of questions.
For instance, do you want this variable to affect that variable?
And then depending on their answer, you can kind of prove parameterized part of the A matrix or something.
And then the actual structure of the A matrix gets windowed down through a sequence of kind of yes, no questions about the different contingencies in the world.
Another thing is interfacing with OpenAI Gym, which we kind of already have done.
Like there's a few examples where we've done this.
I haven't put these on the, on the Infraactively GitHub yet, but this is something that's an open, this is like a very obvious and easy thing to do because like we wrote our environment class as if it was based as if it was a gym environment anyway.
So once you do that, it will open up to comparing active inference agents to all kinds of reinforcement learning algorithms.
So hierarchical models is a big one.
So basically allowing you to stack hierarchically active inference agents within each other.
So like, yeah, there's a lot of temporal depth that you can get out by stacking active inference agents into hierarchical things.
So like one timescale of inference and planning is happening at a slower one, slower than a sub faster timescale.
We need more demos that demonstrate parameter learning.
So you can do updating of A, B and D arrays.
I don't think you can update C so far.
And I know this is something Daniel, you mentioned to me, which is people in your, in the Active Inference Institute are generally interested in updating the beliefs about the generative model parameters basically.
And then there's things like sophisticated inference, which is a kind of a more recent version of planning under active inference.
That's kind of interesting and has some computational benefits to it.
And then hand in hand with sophisticated inference goes this thing that people have developed, have had to deal with in deep reinforcement learning for a while, which is how do you tame combinatorially explosive policy spaces?
So when you're doing deep planning over time, the number of policies is exponential in the number of time steps that you plan in.
So that's, there's various techniques for dealing with that, like Monte Carlo tree search, which I think some people like Théophile, Champion, and others have already tried to start to implement in their own implementations of POMDPs.
And so along these lines, I want to just point out that we're actually very close to getting this working now.
So fitting POMDP models empirical data.
So there's a branch that Dimitri Markovic and I have been working on called the Agent Jax branch.
We've basically written a backend for POMDP and Jax, which not only lets us use a bunch of statistical probabilistic inference techniques from like NumPyro to invert or infer the parameters of POMDP agents from like data, for instance, collected from human participants.
But the fact that it's also backended in Jax means that POMDP is now fully auto-differentiable.
So it means you could stack a deep neural network layer onto the, like before the A matrix layer of a POMDP agent.
And then you could use something like the variational free energy or any other objective functions to automatically train the parameters of a neural network that's linked to a POMDP agent.
So this, I think, just re-implementing it in backends like Pytorch and Jax is like a huge benefit because this will really allow you to extend POMDP to much more high dimensional state spaces by linking up deep neural networks to various components of the agent's body as you were describing it, Daniel.
Daniel. And so we originally did this just to allow you to do fitting of empirical data, but it comes with a side benefit of allowing you to differentiate and pass, like back propagate gradients that you would use for updating deep learning models, which is, I think, really exciting.
So that's like almost done. I mean, yeah, like we're very close to putting up a notebook that actually does that. If you look in the agent Jax branch now, it's not very organized, but that stuff is now there and implemented.
Daniel. Another thing is Noor Sajid and I have actually implemented some of the environments from her paper, Active Inference Demystified Compared, and we've actually done that with Pymdp in OpenAI Gym, like in the frozen lake environment is a popular one for simulating B matrix learning.
Daniel. So that's something that's also just like, we've done that and we need to like upload that or I don't know, write a short paper or do something with that because so there's a lot of like these different tendrils that have been explored.
Daniel. It's just a matter of pushing forward and actually putting them up on the Pymdp repo.
Daniel. Yeah. And then these other things I would like to find time to do, but I just haven't. But I mean, as I kind of said in the beginning, this was a very much a collaborative effort. So I don't also want to be necessarily the one who's like doing all of this because I think it also is healthier for the development of the package if different people are kind of taking the lead on different things and developing it in their own way.
Daniel. So that's something I also just generally like to encourage is for all kinds of interested people to get involved in the development.
Daniel. And I don't think Brennan is here. But Brennan Klein also who's a postdoc and research scientist at Northeastern University at the Network Science Institute. He started these Pymdp fellowships.
Daniel. So you got funding from Northeastern, I think also the Templeton Foundation to fund people to work on Pymdp development or Pymdp adjacent projects.
Daniel. And I think the first round of applications is over, but it would just be, this is a good opportunity to advertise that. I think there's going to be another cohort in the summer.
Daniel. So this is a kind of seemingly ongoing source of funding. So it's just nice to see that other people are kind of trying to push Pymdp in their own directions.
Daniel. So that's just an encouraging development that I want to keep everyone appraised of.
Daniel. Oh yeah. And then I'll just end by
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.
Daniel.


















































We have another, a new demo that's not listed here, which is about just calculating the
variational free energy in discrete categorical models, which is based on a demo from Ryan
Smith and Christopher White and Carl Friston's paper on that big tutorial paper on active
inference.
So I re-implemented one of the demos from that paper, and now that's also in the docs.
Yeah, so you can open all those demo notebooks in Colab and just step through them.
You don't need to have even Python installed on your computer to use them.
You can just open the links in Colab and step through the code and build your own active
inference agents.
So it's just useful for pedagogy.
That's why I mentioned if you're just getting started, I would definitely recommend going
to the documentation.
So yeah, thank you all for listening and for giving me the chance to talk.
It was nice to be here as always.
And I guess like, yeah, I listed at the bottom for the next live stream, we can go through
some of the demo notebooks, but we also could go through them now if there's time.
And we'll do discussion first and then just see if there's time.
Awesome.
Thanks.
Yeah, let's address some questions from Daphne and Jakob.
I'll ask some from the live chat.
And then perhaps you could share one or a few of the examples on the Read the Docs and we
could just look structurally at what the anatomy and physiology is of a notebook.
So first Daphne or Jakob, any thoughts or questions?
Yeah, Jakob, go for it.
I'm wondering on the JAGS implementation, are there any requirements on defining the generative
process at all?
Or is it just about defining the structure of the generative model that we then fit to
experimental data?
And I guess this also relates to another question I had in scaling these models to state spaces
or generative processes that we as modelers don't have the liberty to actually define ourselves,
but we want to deploy and train these agents in generative processes that are already out
there like in an online setting where you get categorical or discrete data coming in.
Yeah, totally.
So on the side of...
That's a great question.
On the side of...
Say I had a PineBP agent that had a bunch of deep neural networks attached to it.
And I wanted to train it in a deployed setting.
So it's like out there, you know, let's say it's an agent that's trading on the stock market
or something.
It's like placing bets to buy cryptocurrency, let's say.
So in that case, in the same way to train a deep neural network on that kind of data, you
don't need to pass gradients through the generative process, which of course you don't have access

You're trading on the stock market.
So in that sense, no, there's no requirements on passing gradients or writing up a generative
process that is also auto-differentiable.
There is one case when you would want that, which is often in the case of empirically fitting
PIMDP models to data.
Often one thing that you want to do is you have a bunch of like...
You basically have a history of actions and observations of a human participant.
You fit the model, the parameters of the PineBP agent that best explain the observed actions of your
participant.
And you know the observations because you're an experimenter who decided this person is going
to see the sequence of observations.
So you can do all that without having a differentiable generative process or environment.
But then there's something in Bayesian inference that's called like a posterior predictive check,
where you say, okay, given my inference about the parameters of the PineBP agent, then I'd like to roll out the expected behavior of this agent, given my best guess for what this agent's parameters are.
So that's called like a posterior predictive density, where you say, given my posterior estimate about the agent's parameters, what would it look like in the future under these posterior parameters?
And to do that in using numpyro, which is the probabilistic inference framework that uses JAX as a backend, you would want to have a generative process that is also auto-differentiable.
But in that case, I expect that writing those generative processes would be easy, because that would be in the case of fitting a human's behavior to experimental data where they're like in a controlled task environment.
So in a case of trying to fit someone's parameters, like the value of their C vector, and they're performing that scene construction task where they're circadian around, you could write the generative process because you as the experimenter developed the psychophysical task that they're interacting with.
And then you could write that also in JAX when you're doing the modeling, so that when you're doing these posterior predictive checks, you know that that's also written in JAX and that you can compute those quantities.
But in a deployed setting, you're not going to even be able to do any kind of posterior predictive check in the future, because you don't know how the environment actually works, right?
So you'd have to, that wouldn't even be something that you tried to do in the first place.
But yeah, so there's nothing inherently stopping you from just, as long as the models are differentiable in the same way they are with deep neural networks, there's nothing stopping you from just throwing them into an environment where you don't know how the rules of the world work.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The inexorable logic of natural selection or free energy minimization or just non-equilibrium systems, whether or not they know what's out there, either it's going to work or it won't.
And if it fails, it fails.
And the computational environment allows us to exist in this kind of gray zone where the computational agent might be quite poorly adapted to a given deployed setting, but the computer program will still run.
But of course, we're interested in cases where the computer program runs and the agent is able to event some kind of meaningful or even useful behavior.
Exactly.
Like we could all imagine very simple PIMDP models that would do terribly in some tasks, right?
Just like a dumb model that has two hidden states that it believes just stochastically switch between each other.
And then you give it the task of making investments in like a 10 stock portfolio.
And of course, its model is not fit.
But the promise of applying big deep function approximators to different ends of the PIMDP agent means that hopefully you could then learn a good generative model and then still combine that with some lower dimensional generative model up top that can do all the nice inference and planning with active inference.
But it can deal with high dimensional or ugly, hard to tame observation and action spaces by using deep neural networks.
So I think that's really the way to just in the same way deep learning has gotten that to work in a lot of cases.
This is the way to kind of do it with PIMDP models as well.
Daphne, any remarks or I'll ask a few from chat.
I don't really have any questions, but I do think that it is really fascinating.
And like, I think it's really exciting to think about.
Yeah.
Like, as you said, like learning the generative model of like an agent learning its own generative model given like some real world data to like figure out like what is them.
And I guess like in terms of what you were talking about with like the function approximations and NumPyro and stuff, is that still like what?
Like are you guys still working like from that code base and then finally convert those or how we kind of started from scratch?
Yeah, we pretty much started from scratch.
The PIDCM thing.
I'm actually not sure what the like the IP status of that is because we worked on it as part of nested minds.
So I don't have access to that code anymore, but that was more implementing like variational Laplace in which you were we worked on that together.
With variational Laplace in JAX, which is the way that you do gradient descent on free energy when you're trying to do inference.
What we're doing now instead of that is we're saying, can you rewrite a PIMDP model such that you can pass gradients through it, JAX, like accelerated gradients, and then use NumPyro to do all kinds of fitting routines, not just variational Laplace.
But you could use MCMC, you could use like NumPyro just has a massive library of different probabilistic approximate Bayesian inference techniques.
So you can kind of throw the kitchen sink of NumPyro inference techniques at a PIMDP model.
So the challenge there is just rewriting a PIMDP model.
So you can define like a likelihood function that goes from like the PIMDP parameters to the observations, which in this case would be the actions of the agent.
And in order to do that in a way so that can like play friendly with JAX, we just had to make sure that all the interior functions of the PIMDP agent, like the inference, the planning, action selection, all of that was written in JAX, so that you can pass gradients through it when computing like likelihood gradients effectively.
So yeah, that makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
All right, I'll ask a few questions from the live chat.
So first, most descriptions of active inference across the literature are written in terms of matrices, but PIMDP clearly works with tensors.
Do you have a good reference for how the operations are different when generalizing the equations for matrices to tensors?
Hmm, that's a really good point.
This is one of the things that actually frustrated me a lot when I was first learning about active inference was I noticed exactly what this person asked is that a lot of the basic operations are written as if there's only single dimensional hidden states and single dimensional observations.
So everything is like they said matrix vector products and matrix math, but what we're really doing is tensor multiplications and tensor products.
So in terms of references for how that works, there's, yeah, so essentially there's nothing super qualitatively different.
These tensor operations that we do in PIMDP are basically just fancier ways of expressing sums of matrix multiplication.
So there's the mathematics of it is all still standard linear algebra.
It's just the way we represent these high dimensional matrices as tensors is just a more efficient representation.
So mathematically, it's nothing too crazy.
The way I learned about how that worked was just by staring at functions in MATLAB for like a year until I just figured it out, but it wasn't easy and there's definitely better options out there now.
So one reference off the bat I'll recommend is the appendices of PIMDP, the archive paper.
So that, like I think appendix A or all of those appendices basically deal with the full tensor factorized version where it's not dealing with matrices, but we're actually indexing into higher dimensions.
Another one, which I think originally discusses the tensor products and the tensor factorization is in an appendix of, I think, active inference, curiosity and insight, which is where they first talked about like novelty and parameter information gain.
That's a paper. I'm sorry, I don't remember the year it came out to either 2017 or 2018, but I know the paper title is called active inference, curiosity and insight.
And in one of the appendices, they actually do the full tensor based mathematics.
And then finally, another good reference is a recent paper that was, I think, headed by Théophile Champignon.
I'm just gonna try to find it real quick because it's, I don't want to forget this.
Maybe I'll stop sharing my screen.
Did I stop? Okay.
It stopped.
It's a really good reference that has appendices about doing tensor math for active inference in particular.
We also recently learned about the branching time active inference, which speaks to some of those questions of computational complexity and all.
Right. Yeah, I should have mentioned that.
That's like probably the most promising approach to date about the, to finessing the computational complexity of active inference.
So yeah, this, this one is by Théophile Champignon, Marek Gresh, I guess that's one of his advisors and Howard Bowman, his other advisor.
And that is called multimodal and multifactor branching time active inference, which I just posted.
So I haven't read this myself, but I've heard from other people.
Like I think Alec Chance told me that the appendices are really good for the, the full tensor generalization of active inference.
All right. Awesome. Well, I've added all of those citations mentioned into the YouTube live chat.
Awesome. Thank you.
I'm going to ask a following question from Fausto.
Using a Jack's backend makes it easy to wrap PYMC3, PIMC3 around it.
E.g. to have PyMDP as an operator to use in a PIMC3 model.
Is there any plan to do this?
I ask because there's a growing Bayesian community in Python around PYMC3.
Hmm. That's really interesting.
I didn't know actually that PYMC3 was also had a Jack's backend.
So I'm, I don't know, to be, to be honest, I'll start by saying that.
I don't know because my introduction to like probabilistic modeling in Python was through Dimi, Dmitry Markovic, who basically sold me on NumPyro.
NumPyro is the way of the future.
And I know NumPyro has a Jack's backend.
And I think NumPyro and PYMC3 occupy a similar place in that ecosystem of probabilistic inference in Python.
I don't know how models are specified in PYMC3.
I am assuming it's not too dissimilar from how it looks in NumPyro.
And because all the low level backend is now written in Jack's, I can't promise this, but I would assume that you could just write a PYMC3 model in the same way we wrote a NumPyro model that wraps PYMDP functions, but only the PYMDP implementation in Jack's.
So if PYMDP only depends on Jack's at the low level, then yes, it certainly can work.
But I don't know, is there anyone else here who has experience using PYMDP and might know?
Because I just don't know enough about it.
I use PYMDP a little bit, but I think it is like, yeah, as you said, like quite similar to NumPyro.
I think that probably you'd be able to do the same things that you're doing with NumPyro, like integrating NumPyro with PYMC3 as well.
Ah, cool.
And so it's primary backend is Jack's?
Is that?
I didn't actually know that.
Yeah, I didn't know that either.
Yeah.
In comparison with the matrix multiplication of MATLAB, what makes you excited about the probabilistic programming direction and all of these packages and approaches that we're naming?
How does the probabilistic programming differ from just writing out the matrices and calculating them on paper?
And why does that have some promise for implementing active inference models?
Hmm.
I think the biggest advantage of the probabilistic programming is not necessarily for simulating active inference agents.
For simulating active inference agents, for sure, the matrix multiplications are sufficient.
Having it in Jack's makes it much more scalable.
So you can use all the vectorized operations to run like tens of thousands of active inference agents simultaneously because you have these highly optimized just-in-time compiled functions in Jack's that allow you to…
It just basically speeds things up in order of magnitude.
But the probabilistic programming angle is not as much for simulating active inference processes as it is for doing inference or fitting models of active inference agents to empirical data.
So say I observe an animal or a person doing something.
Now, what we can do, which we can only do in SPM, but we can't do in PiMVP yet until now, is we can take a sequence of someone's behavior and then infer the best parameters of an active inference model that explain their behavior.
So given how someone decided, I can say, oh, their A matrix must look like this or their C vector must have this precision to it.
Like you could infer someone's risk sensitivity or their risk aversion given their behavior.
And the nice thing about being in probabilistic programming languages is there's so many different methods that haven't been really well explored for fitting active inference models in the MATLAB literature because almost everyone there uses this variational Bayes approach where you basically minimize free energy.
You use a Gaussian approximation to the posterior.
So you use a Gaussian type of variational inference.
You use a Gaussian type of variational inference.
Now that it's in NumPyro or perhaps PiMC3.
Again, this will be very soon.
It's not fully implemented yet.
We'll be able to throw all different kinds of probabilistic inference techniques that have their different advantages and disadvantages.
Like a big thing in probabilistic inferences is MCMC, Markov chain Monte Carlo inference.
It's supposed to give less biased posterior distributions.
Like there's advantages to using MCMC over variational approaches to approximate Bayes and inference.
And one thing that I haven't seen done, which I'd love to see, and a lot of people in the computational psychiatry community have complained and told me what they'd like to see, is like a side-by-side comparison of variational Bayes to infer
PyMDP parameters or POMDP parameters versus like MCMC approaches.
So once you have everything in a probabilistic program framework, you can do side-by-side comparisons between all the different inference techniques that you wouldn't necessarily have if you were limited by a language where only one or two or three inference techniques are implemented.
So it's basically just taking advantage of all the work that people who've worked on NumPyro have done in implementing all these different kinds of inference methods.
Yeah.
Awesome.
And Fausta followed up the primary backend for PyMC is a Sarah, but the new version can use Jack's.
I might get around to writing the PyMC3 wrapper.
Once the Jack's version of PyMDP is stable, it sounds very doable.
Well, that's awesome.
If you see it as likely and you have the affordance, then just minimize your free energy and you won't be surprised when you do that.
Absolutely.
That's great.
That's promising.
Nice.
Jacob or Daphne, or I can ask another question.
Something for me right now.
Well, you mentioned message passing several times in the context of PyMDP.
So what is message passing and how was it used in PyMDP?
Hmm.
It's a good question.
So message passing in general describes like a set of algorithms that you can use to do an exact or approximate Bayesian inference.
So oftentimes in the, to make it very concrete in the, in the context of doing Bayesian inference about hidden states.
So what an active inference agent will have to do when they're faced with some observation, they'll have to combine messages.
Like one message corresponds to the message, the sensory information.
And then another message corresponds to their prior beliefs about the world.
And they use some algorithm to combine those messages to optimize a belief about the current hidden state of the world.
So in PyMDP, we have a very naive kind of computationally efficient doing way of doing that, which we just call naive or vanilla fixed point iteration, which is like the most simple message passing scheme you can think of, which is just, I'm actively filtering hidden states using my priors from the past.
So I say, given where I was at the last time step, where should I be now, given my B matrix?
And then I just essentially combine that with my incoming sensory message, which is just the observation passed through the likelihood matrix, the A matrix.
And then I just combine those two messages together.
And that resulting thing is my posterior distribution, my posterior or best belief about hidden states.
That's like the simplest form of message passing that has this very temporally shallow current evidence combined with prior to form the new belief.
It has this very kind of Bayesian flavor to it, right?
Where the best posterior is just a product of the likelihood and the prior.
There's also more advanced message passing techniques that are used when your beliefs themselves are more complicated.
So in the full implementation of active inference that's in the MATLAB version, agents don't just have a belief about what the current hidden state is.
They have a full predictive and post-predictive kind of tensor or cube of beliefs about all the hidden states in the future and all the hidden states in the past, further condition on all the policies I will potentially take or could have taken in the past.
So you have this massive like belief tensor stretching into future and past hidden states and further factorized by policy.
And when you have that kind of belief that you need to update, you have to use more sophisticated message passing techniques, one of which is called marginal message passing.
There's something called variational message passing.
And all these different message passing techniques are just essentially consistent in passing messages forwards and backwards in time, as well as across different variables that characterize the hidden state, which we call hidden state factors.
And the message passing algorithms are basically still amount to combining sensory information with prior beliefs, but they just have kind of more complicated trajectories through the space of beliefs in the future and the past.
There's people who can explain this much better than me.
I've implemented some of these in PyMDP, but I would refer people to, there's a really nice paper.
I think you may have retweeted it the other day, Jakub.
It's about, it's called mean field.
Oh yeah.
The paper comparing the mean field and Bethy approximation.
Yeah.
And the Bethy approximation.
Neuronal message passing using mean field, Bethy and marginal approximation.
Par Markovich, Keeble and Friston 2019.
It's a paper that a few of us have been walking through, looking at how the different free energy functionals look different under different approximations.
And it'll probably be a focal paper in 2023 for us to really dive into because a lot of these, um, vintage, let's say 2011 to 2019 papers.
Now packages and development directions such as PyMDP are facilitating these methods to be actually used.
And there's a huge wealth of conceptual possibility, proposed heuristics, exciting use cases, relevant other kinds of connections.
And, um, as you brought up earlier, it was very MATLAB bound to bring those kinds of connections into the last mile.
And then especially, um, the more granular or modular developments were under the umbrella of the SPM VBX, which prevented them from being meaningfully shared in a true distributed open science or decentralized science way.
And so that's why, of course, we've been so excited to work with and build on PyMDP and learn about it more because this is exactly the kind of composability of active inference agents and their different implementations that is going to be able to be worked on in a massively distributed way.
Somebody might specify a really interesting A matrix.
Somebody else might specify an interesting B.
Somebody else is going to link those together into a new kind of agent.
Someone else can implement it differently.
Somebody else can implement it differently.
Somebody else can implement it differently.
And so it brings like a natural kind of factorizes the process of developing these algorithms, which previously were almost always either fully MATLAB or, and or bespoke and very custom and fit for a given paper.
But not necessarily adaptable along the relevant axes that one would want to use for a modern, especially Pythonic setting.
So I think that's a great way to think about it.

I couldn't agree more.
I mean, that's a great way of thinking about it too, is like, by making modular flexible code that exists in the ecosystem of other packages, you're essentially factorizing the collective mind's representation of the task at hand, where then different parts of that representation can be worked on without having to pass messages or take into account what's going on across the entire network of distributed workers.
So like someone can write their own, you know, even better message passing algorithm and then just slot it in to use with PyMDP without having had to learn about how every little facet of PyMDP works, you know.
So yeah, that's a really important thing about just open science and modular software development.
So, nice.
Nice.
Well, in our closing minutes, of course, Jakob or Daphne, any remarks or questions?
And also any appetizer, what kind of models are people excited about?
And or what might we see in the following live stream, which will be in January 2023, model stream 7.2?
I would just say that I think that the notebooks are really, really useful.
So like, it's a really great resource for people who are trying to build a model and understand like what's going on under the height of PyMDP.
And I think that it would be really cool to have an extension to those notebooks that also talks about learning the Dirichlet parameters for the A and B matrices.
I think that that would be really, really cool.
And thank you so much, Connor.
You wanted to talk.
Yeah, thank you for coming.
That's a really good point.
And this is something that Daniel also said earlier in the emails that updating A and B is like, it's very, very under documented right now.
And I think that would be because that is a form of learning the generative model that right now we don't, it's not the most sophisticated way.
You still have a fixed number of rows and columns.
So you make some assumptions, but that is like a flexible way when the agents are themselves learning the B and A matrices.
So yeah, we should definitely, maybe that can actually be a, I can just add that into the notebook that I was planning on showing this like a kind of epistemic two armed bandit task.
We can just add in some A or B learning to that and just show how that works or make a new notebook that uses that.
Cool.
Cool.
Eventually for the textbook and for every paper, it would be amazing to be able to see the code, the analytical representation, a graphical representation and different natural language representations, because they're all formally connected and they could all be rendered as such.
And that would really, one might expect, increase the accessibility and rigor of a model and help us compose and connect across different domains and just welcome and recognize many different kinds of learning and modeling.
Absolutely.
Jakob, any thoughts or questions?
No questions at this point, but also just thanks a lot for the awesome presentation.
And I'm really excited about all the emerging integrations and use cases that will undoubtedly spring up.
We've been, we started exploring NumPyro as well and kind of discussing how that can be used for scalable active inference models.
And I'm really excited how PymDP will inter, interoperate with all of these different integrations and it will be very exciting to, you know,
exciting to use.
Thank you.
Connor, any penultimate words?
I guess maybe just in the spirit of what you were saying, I can just show a skeleton of what we could go through next time.
Oh, great. All right. We see it.
Yeah. Is that, is that okay?
You can also see.
Looks great.
Looks great.
So yeah, basically this is a colab notebook.
So I encourage anyone to go to the PymDP tutorial website and each of the notebooks, like Taffney was saying, they have, they're pretty useful and they have colab links associated with them.
And you can just open the link and then explore this one, I think is part of the agent API.
Yeah, this is the same one except I showed this one recently at the course on computational psychiatry.
So I've updated a little bit so I can share this with you, Daniel, and then you could either put on the discord or wherever.
This one's a little bit more updated, but the basic one here will still.
That you can access here will still show the same thing.
But in any case, the thing is you just opened up colab, you need a Google account.
That's the one limitation to use these.
You can install locally, infractively, dash Pymdp, import numpy, mat.lib.
There's just some imports here.
And then this whole, the spirit of this notebook is essentially just going through all the steps in setting up a generative model.
So creating your hidden state factors.
That's something we didn't really talk about is factorized representations in the context of Pymdp.
building the B array, which not only has, like, you can just do it yourself, but there's also these hidden cells with solutions to each of these things.
And then the main brunt of this notebook before running active inference is just stepping through and actually initializing the entries of the A, B, C, and D arrays.
And next time I have some slides to go along with this so we can basically go between the slides and the actual code.
Same thing with the A array.
So you, like, have some representation of what you want the A matrix to look like.
And then you go into the code and actually build it out.
And you do that sequentially for each of the components of the generative model.
And you're plotting them along the way so you can see what it looks like after you've built it.
And then we actually implement, after you've built the generative model, then you actually plug it in to an active inference agent.
So the first stuff is building a factorized A and B for a generic generative model that I think is just a more sophisticated grid world.
But then we actually, that's kind of the introductory task.
And then we go in and we actually build the A's and B's and C's for this epistemic two-armed bandit task, which is basically just like a team A's.
And then you build that out.
You know, you're writing in all the little sub-matrices of your A matrix.
That's why there's so many cells.
Like I said, it's like that's the longest part.
It's actually building things out.
The C vector, basically the reward function, which as Daphne was saying earlier, you're actually encoding in terms of relative log probabilities.
And then finally, you basically do those steps that we discussed during the presentation.
You just plug all your painstakingly generated A's and B's, hopefully not too painstaking, into your agent class.
You generate the two-armed bandit, the epistemic two-armed bandit environment, which is just the rules about how the world works, given the agent's actions.
And then you actually run this active inference loop, which is, as we discussed, just effectively running a loop over time, doing hidden state inference, policy inference, action sampling, and then stepping the environment to get the new observation.
And then at the end, I've just written this helper function that can basically plot the history of choices and beliefs.
So then you, at the very end, this is like the more fun experimental part.
You can mess with the parameters of the environment and also the parameters of the agent's model, and then start seeing how that changes behavior just by kind of iteratively running active inference simulations and plotting the resulting choice behavior and history of beliefs.
So that's the general, that's a little preview, I guess, of what we can do.
And we can also have a little sub module in here.
We're actually letting the agents update their beliefs about the A or the B matrix, which could be cool.
So, awesome.
Awesome.
Looks really exciting.
And on a final SPM note, in the SPM textbook and in experiments, sometimes there are these incredible grayscale matrices that summarize like multiple experimental factors across 100 participants.
And so it's really interesting to see how you show with also that black and white or grayscale matrix representation and how that provides a visual feel for some of these topics that we've been discussing.
And of course, the representation is formally linked with a matrix, but sometimes just saying, well, you have two options and there's 10 states in the world and the likelihoods look like this.
And so, instead of seeing that as like a spreadsheet with numbers, seeing them in the grayscale provides kind of a feel and it looks really nice.
And so it looks like an awesome session we'll have for dot two.
Yeah, totally.
That's interesting that you bring that up.
Like that's something I've just always been doing.
And I think it's very much because I learned all of that from reading those active inference and SPM papers.
So I very much just kind of borrowed that visualization technique from them.
And I kind of took it for granted.
But yeah, it is interesting.
It's clearly not the only way to go.
But I always just found it very intuitive to think of probability.
You just kind of can color it, use colors because the numbers are too specific.
It's the color, the grayscale, that visual aspect really like kind of just shows this thing is more likely than this thing.
Yeah.
Yep.
Cool.
All right.
Well, Yaka, Daphne and Connor, thanks a lot for this awesome session.
And we'll see you in a little bit more than a month for the dot two.
Great.
Thanks so much, Daniel.
And thank you, everyone.
Peace.
Take care.
Bye.
Thanks, everyone.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.


Bye.
Bye.


Bye.
Bye.

Bye.
Bye.


Bye.








Bye.
Bye.

## uX8iSoDR83g

hello and welcome this is model stream
number 007.2 it's the 18th of January
2023 we're back in our second session on
Pi mdp welcome back Connor thanks for
joining again and off to you for a
presentation that you will weave
together with some code examples and the
notebook that we'll use is in the video
description so thanks again Connor off
to you
great thank you Daniel it's great to be
back here again I think I've been here
maybe four or five times now so it's
always a pleasure to be with you all um
so yeah as Daniel said this is the
second
um model stream in a two-part Series
where we'll be discussing implementing
active inference with pi mdp
so um just like there's some background
that I'm assuming you either know from
your own research into active inference
and palm DPS in particular or because
you've watched the first part of the
series so
um I'll just say that to start with like
if you want background I would encourage
you to go watch the first part where we
talk about Pi mdp the motivation for the
package uh what you can do with it in
kind of sweeping terms and then today
we're actually going to go in and use it
to code up an active inference agent
performing a task like a reinforcement
learning style task
um that's very similar to Classic active
inference tests that you can find in the
literature
um yeah so as Daniel said I'm gonna step
through these slides I have pauses for
questions and stuff but we also have
pauses for code
um live coding or side by side coding so
I'll take a pause from the slides and
we'll go over to the
um a collab notebook the link is in the
description of the YouTube video and uh
and we'll kind of code up this agent
based on things that we discuss in the
slides
um it's not that I'll be actually
writing code I'll just be running cell
blocks
um and yeah so if if anyone who's
viewing
um wants to do it themselves you can
open the collab notebook actually let's
start by doing that
because
um so this should be the co-op notebook
that you get brought to when you
um click on the link and then and this
is one copy you need to have a Google
account to use this because Co-op is
linked to your Google Drive of your
Google account so if you're doing this
um on your own this is a shared link but
it's not
um you can't edit it you can't write to
it so what you have to do is go to file
up here then save a copy and drive and
then you'll get your own personal
private copy of the notebook and I'll do
that right now because I'll create a run
copy where we can like manipulate it all
together in real time
so I'll just call it run copy
um and I'll start by just installing
into this collab environment
uh Pi mdp so collab is kind of like
Jupiter notebooks it's an interactive
Cloud hosted notebook for running
different kinds of code but mainly
python code
um so while that's installing and I'll
run that as well
we can start with the slides
Okay so
um
so I'll just start with a quick review
from last time and again go back to the
video if you want to see the full
picture of what we discussed so the
generative models the kind of brains of
the agents that we'll be constructing
are these partially observed Markov
decision processes or Palm DPS
um they have various parameters and it's
kind of up to you how to parameterize
them but under active inference we
typically have these four main
components there's fifth and sixth
depending on how complicated of a model
you want to create but these components
kind of represents the agent's beliefs
about the world that it's operating in
so these are usually hand designed or at
least generally structured on a
case-by-case basis according to the
behavioral task that you're trying to
model so we have the a matrix or a array
which encodes the agent's beliefs about
how hidden states of the world that it's
doing inference about relate to the
observations that it gets you have the B
array which encodes uh beliefs about
transitions or beliefs about Dynamics so
how do hidden States relate to each
other over time
um you have the C vector or C array
which encodes agents prior preferences
for seeing certain sorts of Sensations
so this kind of plays the role of a
quasi-reward function and it has the
effect of biasing Agents action
selection such that it's more likely to
visit states of Affairs that it a priori
expects to see I.E goal directed
Behavior wants to achieve some goal and
then we have the D Vector which is kind
of a baseline prior about what is the
state of the world
um before I get any observations like
what do I believe the hidden State
distribution is and again I'm glossing
over this because I assume that you know
about things like categorical
distributions
um you know the we the all the details
of those these different arrays are
explained more in the first video
um
and just again to show the graphical
model we have the a array relating
hidden States in red to observations in
blue we have the B Matrix or B array
that relate on hidden states to
themselves over time so how does the
world change
and then we have policies Pi which are
uh sequences or collections of actions
that affect Transitions and thereby
change the state of the world
and then you have this critical
quasi-seudo value function to active
inference in Palm DPS active inference
in general which is the expected free
energy and the expected free energy is
the thing you try to minimize as you
optimize your beliefs about policies so
the best policies are those that
minimize expected free energy
and that has a bunch of interesting
terms that lend active inference all of
its interesting curious uh information
seeking behaviors and then this prior
over observations factors into the
computation of that expected free energy
so if you have a particular prior
preference to see some observations that
will affect
which policies get more or less expected
free energy and then you use that to
actually choose a policy
and then of course we have the D Vector
which parameterizes the initial uh
beliefs about his and states
so today
um we're going to actually dive in and
write out our own a b c's and D's for
particular
um a generative model we don't have to
worry about writing it out our own
functions that do inference and or do
planning all of that will be handled by
the abstractions provided by Prime DP
per tip particularly in the agent class
so the Aging class takes the components
of the generative model it gives you
this very kind of Black Box API that you
can just use to perform active inference
um this is a very in the last video we
talked about different levels of
abstraction this is like the top level
of abstraction in pi mdp where you're
just passing a generative model to an
agent and then kind of pressing go on
the agent
um having it interact with the task
environment so typically this is another
class like an environment class or a
task class and then you just kind of
string the two together in an action
perception Loop and uh and you get a
simulation of behavior under active
inference
and this is a a standard thing you'll
see in like open AI gym or other
reinforcement learning packages you'll
have usually like an environment class
and an agent class and they exchange
actions and observations in order so we
we designed the API of Pi mdp very much
uh inspired by that
um Okay so
before we start writing down the
generative model so that a b c and d
um I want to spend a little bit of time
exploring the idea of factorized State
spaces
and this is important because not only
the model we're working today it's
important to understand factorization in
both observations and hidden States
but for almost all the most interesting
Palm DP models you're going to want to
build it's going to be really crucial to
factorize your system in some way not
only because it becomes easier to reason
about and work with when things are
factorized but also it handles a lot of
computational explosions that happen if
you don't factorize your state space
[Music]
um
so it's not it's often useful to
categorically separate observations into
different modalities and hidden States
into different factors so what this
means is that when we get an observation
we're actually getting a collection of
different observations one coming from
each distinct sensory modality or
channel so similarly for hidden States
at any given time the hidden states are
described by a distinct set of different
features or what we call Hidden State
factors and so we refer to this as a
factorized representation because the
different modalities are independent of
each other
and the different hidden states are also
um independent of each other their
Dynamics are so they evolve in time
without ex affecting the other hidden
State factors so that's formally written
down as follows like the modalities
um are conditionally independent of each
other given the hidden States that's
what this factorization of the
likelihood looks like
um so you can think of the different
modalities as different sensory channels
like visual Vision audition
somatosensation and they provide their
own distinct type of information which
are then integrated together during
inference and factorizing the hidden
States is like the idea that any given
time the world can be described by
independent features like an object
being described by both its location and
space as well as its identity
um and factorizing the state's
representations of the model in this way
allows for a few different distinct
advantages one is computational
efficiency both in terms of memory and
um CPU
it simplifies the structure of the
generative model itself so it lends it a
bit of interpretability and transparency
so there's only certain sets of
variables that represent the agent's
beliefs about one feature of the
environment for instance and then
finally some would argue it has a degree
of neuronal or biological plausibility
and is consistent with the idea of
factorized on what others would call
Modular representations in the brain so
this part of this group of neuronal
populations deals with representing
where something is in space and this
group of neuronal populations deals with
representing the Identity or what the
thing is
um so that that's kind of the reason we
do this factorization
um so one of the most classic examples
of uh the the early examples we do in pi
MVP and this can be found on the uh
documentation and on the main page is
this a grid World example where the
agent is kind of
um
navigating in a 2d grid World space uh
then in the notebooks online we do like
a two byte of three by three grid wool
so there's nine total locations and in a
fully unfactorized or what we call an
enumerated State space representation
every location in Grid world has its own
um particular uh like Identity or state
so we just arbitrary can label them like
location zero all the way to location
eight and that that covers all nine
levels of grid World
um this is fine but it especially for a
small state space like a three by three
grid world but it leads to some it kind
of taxes our our memory and our uh our
interpretability a little bit because we
have to remember exactly how our nine
indices map to our uh the different
places in Grid world so like if I'm in
the middle of the grid I need to like
have some kind of lookup table to say
okay location four is uh
like zero or one comma one I.E the
middle location the grid in a factorized
representation
the grid could be represented as two
orthogonal or independent hidden State
factors one is something like the X
displacement or the horizontal
displacement which now just takes three
values like which column of grid world
are you in and then uh vertical
displacement or a y position which is
something like which row of grid will
dot am I in
and so now each hidden state is not a
single nine-dimensional Vector but it's
actually a combination or a pair of two
hidden State factors so two three
vectors instead of a single nine vector
and then a given hidden State itself is
picked out by a coincidence of these two
hidden State factors so if the X
position is one and the Y position is
two then it means I'm in
um
two are one comma two so like the middle
bottom of the of the grid world
and then once you do this so once we
have a factorized hidden state
representation it has implications for
the way we construct the generative
model so in a kind of simple generative
model you would just have one B array
that in the original uh grid World
example just is like nine possible
hidden States the nine possible
locations of where I just was that maps
to the nine possible subsequent hidden
States so the nine possible locations I
could be going to and then you'd have
that nine by nine Matrix conditioned on
the different actions so in the grid
World demo
the actions are typically local like
move up move left move down move right
um but once you factorize things you're
going to actually now have a collection
of B matrices and this is a consequence
of the factorization across the
transition models that we discussed a
few slides ago so you're going to have
one B Matrix or one set of B arrays for
the X displacement so how does the agent
move in the X Direction so these are
what each of these X
um these X displacement
um B matrices look like conditioned on
different actions so this is what it
looks like from moving left this is what
the B Matrix looks like for moving right
and this is what it looks like for stay
and then similarly you'll have another B
Matrix that encodes the agent's
abilities to move in the vertical
direction or Y displacement and
similarly they actually look identical
um because the the world is is like
rotation and translation invariant
and you'll have a another smaller B
array just for y movement this is a very
simple example we're not going to
actually do this in code because it's
kind of trivial but it's just an example
of how instead of having a location
fully enumerated representation you can
split that up into basically a y-axis
and an x-axis
so now we're gonna We're Not Gonna
simulate an active inference agent but
we're just gonna play around with these
data structures to get you used to the
idea of factorized representations and
how that manifests in the code so now
we'll go over to collab
so if you've been running this on your
own this should all be
downloaded
um so you've installed in infra actively
dashed Pine DP that's the whole name of
the package
that's now in your environment and then
you should also run this some basic
Imports like numpy and Pi mdp which is
now in the environment
mm-hmm okay and so the basic variables
that you'll see
are things like
the yes so there's a few variables that
are almost always part of any pine DP
workflow and this is very much mirrored
on how it's done in SPM in the Dem
toolbox so typically you'll have a list
that specifies the dimensionalities or
the number of different levels of each
hidden State Factor so for our three our
three by three grid world nine possible
States we have one X Factor of three
levels and one y factor of three levels
and then the length of that list tells
us the total number of hidden State
factors so in this case we have two
hidden State factors and then similarly
we have uh hidden you have hidden states
are factorized and then similarly you
factorize your control States so for
every hidden State Factor there's also
going to be a control State factor and
the fact that these are also
three-dimensional each just basically
means that the agent has three possible
actions in the x-axis and three possible
actions in the y-axis and then the
number of control factors is also gonna
be two in that case
and so we have some nice utility
functions that can quickly build a b
array given the the two things that are
necessary uh the num States and num
controls variables so you just do
uh initialize empty B
some states and number controls
and then you'll have
a b Matrix
that has you know the correct shapes and
stuff
so three rows three columns and three
possible actions for the X Direction and
similarly for the Y Direction so this is
just basic setting up your variables
um
and often we'll have these solution
cells that are hidden underneath each
little quasi exercise so that's
something you can do as well
okay and so that's just and that's just
initializing an empty array right so we
don't actually know what's uh
what those contingencies are that we saw
in the in the slides but if we want to
populate this thing
so this is what each
Factor specific B array looks like then
we have to go into these matrices and
actually fill out the rows columns and
third order slices with numbers so for
instance this Loop where we Loop over
factors and we fill out the different
entries of the B array what this will do
is just encode those local actions like
move left move right for The X Factor
and then move up move down for the Y
factor and so once you've run that code
you basically filled out all the numbers
in that that Big Empty B array that you
started and then you can use things like
the plot likelihood function to to plot
these likelihood distributions action
conditioned likelihood distributions as
matrices so this is move uh left for
instance if we're in the x hidden State
factor and if we change this to a one
we've changed the action index then this
is
move right and then similarly if we
change this this is move
down if we're doing action one here
um oh and just uh so darker colors
whether it's grayscale or red or
whatever
almost unanimously in Prime DP the
darker colors represent more probability
so that's just for
um
so instead of having to display numbers
we'll just show darker numbers
okay so now let's go back to the slides
and talk about the a arrays
so in in our unfactorized fully
enumerated grid World example and again
I'll refer you to the documentation of
primevp if if uh if you want to like
play around with that example the hidden
State factors which are just these nine
kind of arbitrarily labeled locations
map to an observation modality which is
like the agent's sensation of its own
position kind of appropriate receptive
GPS modality you could think of it as
like they're sensing where they are at
any given time and so um there are
various ways you could uh encode that
but let's just pretend that they have a
very high fidelity GPS so they're
getting precise GPS readouts of where
they are at any given time so in in a
fully enumerated world that a matrix
that likelihood modality would look like
this
when we start factorizing things so
splitting up the hidden State factors
into an X Factor and a y factor that
choice not only manifests in the B
arrays but it also manifests in the
structure of the areas and I think this
is one of the most key things to
understand because when it comes to
coding these things up yourself
understand how these arrays are
structured is really important to
getting things working
um
like successfully
so it's basically getting used to
multi-dimensional indexing so
the briefly uh in summary when you have
multiple hidden State factors that
manifests as extra lagging Dimensions or
extra higher order dimensions in your um
in your a array so it's not really an a
matrix anymore it's an a tensor so that
means if you have two hidden State
factors the number of lagging Dimensions
I.E excluding rows that's what I mean
when I say lagging Dimensions will be
two so you have columns and slices in
addition to rows so this is really
important to understand when either
using SPM or pi mdp to do pom DP based
active inference and another way of
saying this is for each additional
random variable that we're conditioning
our observations on we have an
additional lagging dimension in our
array so this is the same Principle as
with the B matrices because we condition
the next state both on the past State
and the past action that's why the B
arrays are also tensors so we have two
extra dimensions in the B array one for
each conditioning variable past State
and past action so now in the in the X
and Y factorized grid world we have two
lagging Dimensions where the first
lagging Dimension the columns in blue
index a particular X location and the
second lagging Dimension the slices if
you will index a particular Y location
so now what I'm going to do
is unwrap these slices of the
multi-dimensional a matrix
um
and so you can see that each slice of
the a matrix so that each purple indexed
third order slice corresponds to
conditioning on a particular setting of
Y so a particular conditional
distribution over observations for the
three settings of X for a fixed value of
y so each slice is exactly this
conditional distribution
where we're looking at the conditional
distributions over observations for each
setting of X so those are the The
Columns indexed by the blue numbers at
the bottom
but we're fixing to one value of y so
that's the conditional distribution over
observations 0 1 and 2 so being in the
top row given that we're in the first
the first row y equals zero for the
three possible settings of X and then we
move down to this next set of
observations
and uh the next slice of Y and it looks
like that and then finally like that
so this is the case where our GPS is uh
noiseless and High Fidelity right that's
why we have like hyper Dark Cells and
then everything else is white is because
the agent believes that its observations
are High Fidelity
um signals of the actual hidden State
namely the X comma Y location
so then when we Pat these back together
we see how this full a matrix or set of
conditional distributions will be
represented by a nine by three by three
tensor where again each lagging
Dimension exists to encode the
conditional dependencies between that
particular hidden State Factor indexed
by the lagging Dimension and the
observations for this modality so when I
index into the ith column and the jth
slice of this a matrix or a tensor I'm
basically slicing out a particular
conditional distribution over
observations where I'm deciding what
settings
of the conditional distributions or the
conditional very random variables I'm
interested in
um
okay so yeah that's uh that's a kind of
critical concept and to just uh make it
more
um tangible and clear
and I mean to be clear this isn't the
only way to encode conditional
dependencies in categorical
distributions but it's just the way that
was originally uh used in SPM to encode
these dependencies and then we just
borrowed that convention when building a
primevp and it's pretty useful because
it makes generating things like
conditional expectations pretty
straightforward
um using like a linear algebra
operations like
higher order dot products and stuff like
that so we have this
kind of unwrapped representation of the
array here and we can use this to
uh to refer back to when we're building
our array so
um one thing I didn't mention that is
also important is that in the same way
we can factorize hidden States we can
factorize modalities so we'll have we'll
talk about that in a second but just for
now let's assume we have one single GPS
sensing modality of nine possible levels
of where I am in Grid world so it's just
a list of one number nine
and then the number of modalities will
trivially be one the length of that list
and then we can use similarly this utils
initialize empty a array which takes the
number of observation modalities their
dimensions and the number of hidden
States
and then it creates
um the a array with the proper
dimensions and everything
so I've also created this combined list
called a location dims which is a
combination of the number of observation
modality dimensions and the number of
hidden State Factor Dimensions so that's
as we said going to be 933
and so then we can populate our first
the entry of our first modality in the a
matrix which is trivially here the only
modality with a matrix of zeros
this is actually what's happening under
the hood in this thing so we don't need
to do it here
but then if we just run that then we'll
see that the shape of a0 is the same as
a location divs
um okay so that's just initializing it
so we now have one a array that has one
modality whose shape is nine by three by
three and then we just go and fill it
out like we saw up here so I'm filling
it out under the assumption of this
noiseless high high quality GPS sensor
so you can see when I'm indexing into
the lagging Dimension here the the Y
Dimension which is the third dimension
of the tensor I'm saying for this
particular value of y which is when Y is
zero
um we're in the first row of grid world
then the conditional distribution over
the three settings of the GPS given all
the settings of X is just an identity
Matrix so I'm just coding that that
little chunk right there and then we can
go through each of the slices
iteratively and do that
um so yeah one of the things I think is
a disadvantage currently of both Prime
DP and the SPM is I think we need better
ways to make people not have to do these
multi-dimensional indexing operations to
encode a particular conditional
independency structure and I thought of
ways to do that but it's actually pretty
hard to do that in a generic flexible
way where people can just come to the
table with their own semantics and then
all this gets done for them so for now
you still have to kind of do this by
hand or write some algorithmic way to do
it that's specific to your task
but uh but yeah that's just something to
mention is like it would it's not ideal
that we have users doing this but I at
the moment I can't really think of a
better way to do it
um
and then once we've encoded that we can
look at our little conditional
distributions given different settings
of why you know and that's just one
choice we could also condition on X and
look at for all settings of Y
x equals zero
like you can slice this up however you
want right
um that's just a a visualization choice
and these are our three
collections of conditional distributions
one for each setting of Y
okay
um
you know let's go back to the slides
yes so one thing I didn't mention uh or
I said I would mention is we we just had
a a single observation modality but just
as for hidden States we can factorize
um and we don't have to fully enumerate
our observation space so we could
separate the grid GPS observations into
an X and A Y GPS so now you're observing
a pair of different observations at any
given time One X observation and one y
so just like we had a separate B array
for each hidden State Factor similarly
we now have a separate a array for each
observation modality so we would
populate one big a object array with
these different modality specific Aras
so in this case if we had X observations
and Y observations we would have two a
sub arrays each one would have size
three by three by three because three
observations and then for the two
possible states of the Hidden State
factors
so yeah that wraps up the the um slides
I had on
multi-factor multi modality factorized
representations and how that affects A
and B arrays so uh before we move on to
the contextual multi-arm Bandit um let's
open it up for questions or comments if
anything was unclear and someone wants
to contribute their own way of
explaining something I'm happy to talk
about that now
awesome Jacob then Adam and Carl if
you'd like
yeah uh thanks a lot for the great uh
overview I had a question on uh
initializing the B Matrix so in this
case we uh initialized it with the
simplest policy just all of the
available actions the agent has is there
um
would there be any particular use case
in the grid World example where we would
want to initialize it with a sequence
of uh of policies and is that needed if
we want to do planning of different
temporal depth
So when you say sequence of policies can
you give me like an example
like instead of in instead of
um conditioning uh conditioning
it on just move up viewed conditioning
on move up and down
fixed sequences of of actions
right right that's interesting okay so
that's so yeah typically when we are
building these transition likelihoods
this is more of a consequence of the
fact that it's a palm
a p-o-m-dp with an emphasis on the m so
it's markovian so if you want to
encode something like
what is the predicted next hidden State
given
I did move up and move down in the last
two time steps if I'm understanding
correctly you're like saying can
condition my B Matrix my next hidden
State on a sequence of two possible uh
past actions then we're breaking the
Markov property of the Dynamics because
we're saying the next thing says not
just depends on what I did at the last
time step in the end the state but it
depends on also what I did two time
steps ago so now you have a higher order
temporal dependence like a semi-markov
model or uh yeah really just not a
markup model but a higher order model
and that's not something that's
currently supported in pi mdp the
natural way you get around that is by
building a hierarchical model
um so at at each individual
um level of the hierarchy you have a pom
DP but then when you look at a single
layer like the bottom layer of this
hierarchical model
it is a semi-markov model or
non-markovian if you take into account
what all the other layers are doing
um but but that's not uh currently
supported at the level of a single
Markov model like you can't build a b
Matrix that's dependent on more than
what happened at the last time step it
always has to you yeah you can't have
like an extra lagging Dimension that
encodes also what were they doing two
time steps ago
um
that so that's one interpretation of
when you say policy like up down I think
of two actions uh that happen in in
locks in sequence
um but maybe another thing and correct
me if I'm uh reading too deeply into
your question another thing would be can
I have actions in a different control
State Factor affect the Dynamics of the
of a particular hidden State Factor so
say I had one hidden State factor which
is move up
uh and another uh I said one factor
which is y displacement another Factor
that's X displacement can I have the
Dynamics of the Y Factor not just depend
on my y action but also on my X action
um so that's the idea of
basically breaking
this uh conditional sorry this
Independence property
where is it here
I don't know let me find it here
so if you
you allowed the lower right shows that
the dynamic the state of one factor over
time only depends on the state of of
that factor at the previous time step
but if you said I could also can make
this conditionally dependent
on not just factor F but say Factor
um I or Q
at T minus one
this is something that's also not
currently supported but I think is an
interesting idea which is you would
actually have interactions between maybe
pairs of hidden State factors
in in Hidden State space this actually
can be accommodated under uh Pine DP
like like mathematically I haven't built
in the functionality to do it but I
think there's nothing that stops you in
principle from doing this so this would
be as if I can have actions from
different control factors all
influencing the next state of one hidden
State Factor
um and that is something that will
probably make the message passing
a little bit more not maybe not more
complicated but maybe there's
convergence properties wouldn't be as
guaranteed I don't know what it looks
because you're introducing weird Loops
in your your graph but um in the factor
graph that represents the generative
model but uh that's something in theory
could be uh entertained but I I don't
know if that's actually what you had in
mind maybe you had more in mind of
breaking the Markov property when you
say
yeah it was
um thank you for the answer it was more
of a clarification also on the
mathematical notation uh because uh
Pi uh it's interpreted as policy which I
guess can be both individual actions and
sequences of actions
um yeah so just wanted to clarify that
yeah that's a good point so when I said
Pi up here
I meant
um
I meant yeah so
in in if Paul if Pi was a sequence of
actions that any any given time the B
Matrix that you're indexing out is
conditioned on the action that's
entailed by the policy at that
particular time but the B Matrix will
never be entailed on like what's going
on in the full policy but just by okay
at time t i take out this slice of the B
Matrix because at time T this is the
action entailed by this policy of
sequence length H or something but uh
yeah that's a good point so in the in in
a trivial case policy length is one and
there's just one action that's
uh the policy is just an action that
comes down to slice out the b Matrix
thanks Jacob Adam anything you like to
add go for it yeah a couple follow-ups
uh thank you for this very clear
presentation Connor so first um just to
follow on what Yakov just asked it seems
like another potential way if you wanted
to do this sort of two-time Step uh
model would be to actually condenser or
kind of permute those two time steps
into a single uh variable the same way
that you you know could condense the row
and column into a single nine Dimension
you know nine nine row vector or you can
break it down into two could you
similarly break down the last two moves
and sort of combine them into a
permutation of all possibilities of the
last two moves and have those be the
hidden States
yeah uh you could do that as well I
don't I haven't seen that actually done
in practice the only thing is you'd have
to actually have to somehow change the
there
[Music]
um
you have to change the the scheduling I
guess of the message passing in the
action to accommodate the fact that
before I determine what my last hidden
state was I need to like wait two time
steps so I can get not only the proximal
action I did but also have this memory
of the action two time steps ago
um yeah I was imagining that you'd have
some special special case for the first
move where it's like undefined and then
the last move then after that you'd have
the last two moves a separate Matrix for
those or something yeah like a moving
window kind of so it's always yeah
remembering the last yeah I I could see
that working
um I think like the active like kind of
the canonical active inference
answer to that is instead of having to
kind of manufacture this special way of
represent of basically baking memory
into a markovian system the classical
way to handle that is just to build a
hierarchical model because the
hierarchical model handles that memory
um easily by just having
like nested markovian processes where if
you if you were to look at a single
process it looks like it has memory but
that's just because it's priors for its
own markovian process are evolving as a
function of another Palm DP that's
operating at a slower time scale
um so like I I could imagine doing that
exact exact thing that you're talking
about if you had a
low-level Palm DP that was moving twice
as fast as the top level Palm DP and so
basically with the top level Palm DP is
doing is setting an initial prior over
one action that then allows the slow
level Palm DP to condition whatever it
does next on the behave on like a belief
that whatever I do next I know that I
just took
um this action two time steps ago but
you don't actually have to hand craft
that it's just by building a one Palm DP
like within another Palm DP
um but I don't see that there's anything
in principle going against what you're
describing as well
it's just yeah I like your approach a
lot better
yeah this is this is um I mean
essentially what I learned from from
working with Carl was that like any time
you're trying to imbue a system with
more complex non-markovian Memory full
Dynamics or higher order dependencies
that's when you it's the natural move is
to go to a hierarchical model
um because it kind of handles it all
naturally
[Music]
so my next question is
um about the uh what you were sort of
tweaking in that formula just a couple
minutes ago where you were suggesting
the possibility that there could be
feedback loops you know between the
hidden States in theory but but as
currently implemented if I understood
correctly that's not the case the state
of us of one of the Hidden variables or
so in the state of one of the Hidden
States depends only on
the previous dates of that the previous
state of that hidden State as currently
yeah but I want to make yeah a hidden
Factor what I want to make sure I I
understand is that is that also
something about
the markovian Assumption or is that just
sort of an implementation or design
decision
completely separate from the markup
yeah that's that's a good question
that's separate from the Markov
um that's separate from the markovian
Assumption so that's something having to
do with kind of just how the graph that
represents the generative model which
you could think of as like a Bayesian
graph like a bunch of nodes
that uh affects a layer of observations
so you say a bunch of hidden State nodes
that all uh
all have all the observation nodes
conditionally depend on the state of all
the hidden State Factor nodes by
constructing it this way you basically
have a graph that it's very easy to do
inference on that has like stationary
fixed points so the inference does not
depend on like initial conditions of the
posteriors and things like that so um
this is like a kind of a bar the way the
generic model is set up right now is
like a bipartite graph that resembles a
classic
um uh model for machine learning called
like a restricted boltzmann machine so
this is where all the hidden States
can all affect one uh observation
modality but there's no interactions
between the observation layers so
there's no lines going between
observations within one modality and
there's also no lines going between
hitting State factors so that's that's
kind of what we're what one of the
advantages of this assumption is is when
you have the hidden State factors be
only dependent on their own past State
and their own past action within that
control Factor then you're not
introducing these Loops in the graph
that make inference a little bit harder
so you'll see this structure in when
people are using like restricted
Baltimore machines or other or even deep
neural networks it's very hard to get a
fixed Point solutions for like the
posteriors when you're when you have
interactions between nodes in a single
layer so it's not quite the same thing
as as
um it's yeah it's just not the same
thing as a the Markov property has more
having to do with generating an acyclic
graph so you can do a fast efficient and
fixed Point inference on it I mean that
that's my general answer to that because
if you look actually draw out the factor
graph for these things it looks
like that but there might be another
reason this is done that I'm actually
not aware of
um maybe that's something that Carl uh
would know
but or or someone else
if you want to add anything Carl
otherwise
and then after this we'll head into the
script go for it Carl thank you
um yeah I think everything that needs to
be said has already been said very very
clearly and very usefully uh but yes
Connor's absolutely right
um so I look at this
um in terms of the overall architecture
of the graphical model you bring to the
table and you know it can only have a
number of different attributes you know
how deep is it how many levels does it
have
um we're not in this presentation
talking about uh deep uh
um mdp or generative models based upon
um
um hierarchically composed uh Markov
decision uh processes uh but we you know
generally you would think of any one
level in the context of the level above
and the level below and that lends this
attribute of depth to Any Given
generative model but probably more
important certainly from the point of
view of the current discussion is the
Barrette and the barrette's basically
the number of uh
independent actors in physics this is
simply known as the field approximation
it's you know it's just the
factorization of a joint distribution in
this instance
um
what we're aiming for is an approximate
posterior distribution but it's a
factorization into conditionally
independent factors that incidentally
also induces certain Markov blankets and
resolves a lot of the message passing
and uh means sort of variational
iterations are more robust but
um from the point of view of your why do
you do that well you do that because to
maximize the marginal likelihood of the
evidence for your generative model you
have to carve the nature out there at
its joints in the right kind of way so
if the world you're trying to navigate
or exchange with or explain
um does have the this factorization is
conditional independencies it is carved
in this way then your model has to
comply in order to have the maximum
evidence
um so when learning that particular
factorization or that structure you
would normally apply a process of basic
model selection or structure loan to get
the number of factors right so and that
is getting the right kind of mean
approximation apt for this world and and
these data and the right factorization
will simply minimize variational free
energy and therefore minimize the
computational complexity and also the uh
the computational complexity expressed
in terms of thermodynamics for example
so it's a really important sort of thing
and there's a couple of the little um
endorsement comments
um you know
conditioning any one
um state with any one factor on States
and other factors destroys that that
particular factorization so you don't
have to worry about introducing loops
and things all you all you're doing is
saying that particular factorization has
gone away you've coarse grained and you
now have to lump together all the
elements of one factor and the other
factor into one bigger factor and now
you've got a couple more coarse grain
factorization and more
mathematically complex model because you
haven't done as many carvings uh in you
know tourism you know to Leverage The
conditional independencies that you
um you're trying to model and the first
question about the policy is that that
was an interesting one I suspect it may
be an artifact of um the way that we
condition everything on I without sort
of forwarding people I is actually quite
a complicated variable
um first of all it's basically you're an
index or a a name for quite a
complicated combination of things so not
only is it a sequence of
um actions
um upon which you condition each
individual transition at any point in
time over time so it's a sequence of
actions so an answer to Jacob's question
um you know the whole point of the
expeditary energy is exploring lots and
lots of different sequences as you run
out into the future
um
but also
um induced by the factorization as Conor
was saying
um the that pie actually has to now
entail a action for every factor of a
fixed combination so if you change the
the combination of actions for two
factors you now have a different policy
even at one time step even for one step
ahead so the notion of a policy as a
combination of actions uh is still in
play when you have a factorized mean
field approximation of the Hidden States
so if you know it's a subtle Point
usually would resolve it by actually
explicitly writing down usually the
using the variable U the thing that
you're conditioning the state
transitions on and then you
um comes from a family of combinations
of views over factors and over time
um so you can have deep and shallow
policies but even you've got very
shallow policies one step ahead and one
look ahead apologize there's still a
subset of combinations of actions you
know so it could be that you can either
only move up or or down sorry up or to
the left but you can't move diagonally
for example yeah and so and that will be
placed um in terms of priors over Pi
namely combinations of of actions
oh so one final just for for Adam's
benefit that notion of um
putting semi-markovian Dynamics and I'm
getting kind of absolutely right that
the other the way that
um as a physicist the way you do that is
by appealing to the depth of the
hierarchical model which always entails
time and that's that's an absolutely
crucial observation there's no point in
adding depth to a generative model
unless you are mindful it is introducing
a separation of temporal time scales and
I think you know that's a profound
this sort of a structural insight into
the nature of genital models and has all
sorts of implications
um but then it you know just speaking to
this notion of sort of having
combinations of little histories or
little caches of Legacy State
um as if you like a superstead
um strictly speaking that is exactly
what is done effectively in continuous
text-based models with common filters so
you you actually have now two kinds of
random variables the position and the
velocity so you you've now got a sort of
dual representation and if you
generalize that you get a generalized
points of motion so you know
and technically
um when you're doing variational message
passing you now use something called a
chef face free energy as opposed to
which is a variant of variational free
energy
um however when you move to discrete
States there's generalized coordinates
now actually are replaced just by having
um states that unfold in time over the
um under the public transition Matrix so
that you you shouldn't in principle ever
need to do that but you can now regard
if you like the little local history the
little little packet or trajectory or
orbit
the path that you're taking at this
point at this Temple scale
um as sufficiently discretized and cause
brain with the different probability
transition matrices and then at the
slower time scale then it's a succession
of initial States that's normally how we
would think about that but it's a it's
an interesting
game to think about how what kinds of
structures in these dispute States based
models Echo the equivalent movements one
has to make in continuous State space
modeling and uh and thinking here
particularly generalized filtering and
Bayesian smoothing and Bayesian
filtering and the line
yeah thank you that's a really it's
really nice to have uh those
afterthought like because that clarifies
I think and justifies a lot of the
preceding slides or what what Carl just
said
um
yeah that's that's a good I I so you can
kind of map the depth of the hierarchy
think of the depth of the hierarchy as a
discretization of what is smoothly
handled with generalized filtering and
generalized coordinates of motion
um so States evolving at this Pawn DP
are kind of like a quasi-velocity
variable
uh because they are evolving slower than
the position variable which is like the
low level quick faster clock uh Palm DP
one one just tiny footnote there is it
relates to the continuous and
differentiable free energy landscape and
the discretization that is required on
Modern digital Hardware around sampling
and the discretization problem on a
continuous but hidden
function
and the approaches that we have to take
to discretize the continuous nature of
time especially
absolutely
[Music]
okay
um
so
I think we should proceed to the um the
multi-on Bandit
um okay so now having discussed these
kind of factorized representations we're
in a position to build our multi-factor
generative model for what I'm calling a
contextual two-armed Bandit or
contextual multi-arm Bandit this is
coming from the um you know
reinforcement learning literature This
this term contextual but
uh it's based directly on a kind of
gambling task that was introduced in
Ryan Smith Christopher white Carl's
friston's step-by-step tutorial on
active inference so you basically have a
multi-arm bandit two-armed Bandit but
you have to first find a clue or uh
forage information to figure out which
of the two slot machines or arms of the
Bandit is more favorable and this is
echoed as well in the original teammates
example where you have a rat that has to
choose between two arms one is more
rewarding than the other but you don't
know which one is rewarding so you have
to visit a informative Q State first
that tells you the left one is rewarding
right now or the right one is rewarding
so this I'm just kind of gathering all
these things into the term contextual
Bandit because that's kind of the
analogous uh term for this problem that
you'll find in like reinforcement
learning world
um okay
so in the multi-arm Bandit or two on
Bandit task an agent has to play choose
to play one of two slot machines and
they can only play one at a time so one
of the slot machines gives more reward
than the other but the agent doesn't
know which is the better one so at any
given time the agent can choose to play
the left or the right machine that's
what we'll call them or can choose to
ask for a hint
and if it chooses to ask for a hint
instead of playing the machine it
receives information about which of the
two slot machines is better so this sets
up this already sets up the basic
dilemma of tasks like this the so-called
explore exploit dilemma so you first
Forge for information that will
ultimately lead to getting more reward
or do you gamble immediately in order to
get rewards sooner but at the risk of
not having enough information to know
which uh slot machine I should actually
play so to encode this task structure
into a generative model for a palm DP we
equip the agent with three observation
modalities first we have this hint
modality which is the sensory channel
the agent uses to perceive the hint so
just what is the state of the hint then
there's a reward modality which tells
the agent whether it won or lost at the
selected machine and then finally
there's a choice modality which is just
the agent's proprioceptive observation
of its own choice this is equivalent to
the GPS modality that we were working
with in Grid world
and in terms of hidden State factors we
first have a context factor which is a
binary variable encoding Which slot
machine is the more rewarding one either
the left machine is better or the right
machine is better so those are the names
of the two context variables you could
just arbitrary enable in my context a
context b or something like that and
then we have a choice hidden State
factor which is simply encoding the
choice state that the agent currently
occupies
um and finally as Carl was just
explaining for each hidden State Factor
you also have a control Factor so we'll
have a context control factor which as
we'll see is Trivial since the agent
can't control the context in in this
particular
um simulation and a choice control
factor which is the control factor that
allows the agent to model its own
actions or choices so even for a shallow
policy Horizon as Carl was explaining
a policy will still be comprised of two
actions so it'll be there will be a
context action and a choice action but
as we'll see the context action will
always be to do nothing or basically to
not be able to interfere in the Dynamics
of the context Wednesday factors so
basically action selection comes down to
just choosing the state of the choice
control Factor
on that you Choice variable so now we're
going to look at the different levels of
the Hidden State factors
so as we said the context one is a
binary
um or you could think of it as like a
Bernoulli variable so it's either left
bed or right better it's a distribution
over these two states of the context
and this is just the unchanging state of
the world for a particular trial either
left machine has a better payoff
probability or the right one does
and then the choice hidden State Factor
has four levels which correspond to the
four possible Choice states that the
agent can be in so this can either be
the neutral starting location
on the hint state which is the location
they they occupy when they're acquiring
the hint
um and or they can be playing the left
machine or they can be playing the right
machine and so now for the control State
factors
the control State factor for the context
only has one level you can call it do
nothing or it's just a trivial
one-dimensional variable and the agent
will always take this action with 100
probability
so in other words the agent um has no
control over the state of the context
and then the choice control state has
four levels corresponding to the
decision to change
um the S Choice the hidden State factor
for the choice state in one of four
different ways either it can move to the
start location it can move to the hint
location it can play the left machine or
it can play the right machine so what
choice State the agent is in is kind of
obviously under the agent's control
which is encoded by the fact that this
u-choice variable has four levels
so optimizing a posterior distribution
over this Choice uh control State Factor
that's that's what action selection and
planning boils down to is basically
choosing what level of you Choice I'm
we're inferring what uh the distribution
over you choices and then sampling or
taking the ARG Max of that distribution
to actually make an action
okay so now let's review the observation
modalities and their different levels
the first modality is the hint modality
which can either give the outcomes of
null like I'm not at the hint state so
I'm getting no sensory information from
that channel a left is better hint hint
left or right is better hint and they're
just named that because you will see in
the a matrix how seeing that observation
relates to seeing the um two to the the
state of the context
um we have the null observation because
as I said if the agent isn't in the
choice state of getting a Hint it still
needs to receive some information from
that modality so that's why we often
have in both the SPM and the pine BP
implementations we have this null
observation that just encodes an
observation that has uh has no
information about hidden States within
uh some particular Factor
and then we have a reward modality which
similarly has a null observation for
when the agent isn't playing either slot
machine and then two possible reward
observations either a loss or a reward
but this is a a choice that can um
depends on what you're trying to do you
could also make a reward have like 10
different reward levels that have
different like magnitudes of rewards
it's just a choice to
call these like loss and reward one the
point being that one is preferred
relative to the other
and then finally we have the choice
modality which just allows the agent to
unambiguously infer what choice State
it's in so it just allows it to infer
what it's doing and this is important
because remember in active inference
everything has to be inferred everything
is about is in the game of minimizing
free energy and
um coming up with uh posteriors
approximate beliefs about the state of
the world including your own choice
state so that's why we often equip
agents with a proprioceptive sense of
where where I am like a GPS
um
yeah okay and and so that that's the
three observation manage we've done the
hidden States and the controls so now
we're in a position to start building
the a arrays for this agent's generative
model so for each modality specific a
array we're going to have as many rows
as there are levels of that modality and
then two columns and four slices and so
why is it two columns four slices
because each column corresponds to a
setting of the context hit and state
factor and each third order slice
corresponds to a setting of The Choice
State hidden State factor and these
lagging
dimensions of two columns four slices
will be the same for every single a
matrix not not the values in them but
that shape so the only thing that will
change across modalities the a uh
modality specific a arrays is the number
of rows which is the number of
observation levels so for the hint
modality each slice of this a matrix
tells us the mapping between the two
possible context States and the
observations in the hint modality for a
fixed Choice state that the agent could
be in so for instance if the agent is in
the start Choice State what we're seeing
now regardless of whether the left or
the right mission is better the agent
will always get the null observation
which has zero information about the
state of the context as you can see
because given
an observation of the null observation
in the hint modality you have no idea
whether the left is better or the right
is better however if the agent is in the
visit a hint state or acquire a hint
State then the mapping between the
contact State and the two hint
observations will be informative and why
I I say informative I just mean that the
columns of this Matrix will uh be
independent from each other and they
will be low entropy so another way
that's saying that is that there'll be
low entropy in the observation
conditioned rows of the Matrix so uh
briefly what we're seeing here where
grayscale darker colors means more
probability
if the slot less machine is better
that's the context then the agent is
more likely to see the hint left
observation and if the right machine is
better they're more likely to see the
the hint right observation so this slice
of the a matrix is what gives those
observation levels their their meaning
the the very region they're called Hit
left and hit right is just because of
the the kind of diagonal structure in
this slice of the Matrix and then
finally for the other states
um if I'm playing the left or the right
machine I'm never getting any
informative observations from this
modality
[Music]
um okay and then we move on to the
reward modality so again two columns and
four slices like for all the arrays but
now we're looking at the mapping between
the two context and the reward
observation levels so no loss reward for
each possible Choice State the agent can
be in so as we can see if the agent is
in starting location or getting the hint
they're not getting uh any reward
observation they get the trivial
meaningless null observation however if
the agent is playing the left or the
right machine
though there's a probabilistic mapping
between the context the left machine or
the right machine being better
and and uh the expected rewards so if
the context is left is better then the
agent is more likely to see the reward
if and only if they're playing the left
machine
uh likewise if they're playing the right
machine this Matrix
uh is the same so if you're paying right
then you're more likely to see reward so
this is this sub Matrix within this big
a tensor is what determines the payoff
structure of the task
um or the agent's beliefs about that
payoff structure I should say because
this is the area it's not the actual
rules of the game so now we're finally
up to the choice modality which again is
just their observation of Their Own
Choice state which you can see only
depends on the state of the choice
that they're making it doesn't depend on
the context so it just means that
they'll always unambiguously infer uh
whether they're playing the right
machine or they're in the start state or
whatnot so this is just an example of
going through those slices and really
seeing how that looks so now we can code
this up in collab and again we won't be
doing it by hand we'll just be
um we'll just be running some predefined
code so one useful thing to do often
with control factors and observation
modalities is get some semantic labels
like create a list of strings for
instance so the context names will have
these two states left better right
better choice names will have these four
possible States and then we can
automatically create these lists of
Dimensions that are needed to create
your A and B matrices just by looking at
things like the length of this list of
strings or the length of this list of
choice names so if you run this
then we'll have our num States
variable which will be
2 4 2 possible contexts and four
possible Choice States and then you'll
have num OBS which will be yeah three
possible hints three possible rewards
and four
proprioceptive location or Choice State
observations and then we can use this
function to initialize our empty a
matrix
and in the next few chunks of code
basically just fill out these a matrices
like we saw in the slides
um so one thing we'll do is we will have
two parameters and this is again
arbitrary you can choose to do this
however you want we'll parameterize the
a matrix with a probability of hint or a
hint accuracy which will effectively
just fill out that slice of the hint
modality a array that corresponds to how
accurately the hint
um signal
uh indicates the context or or lends
evidence to the context so if the hint
is 100 is 1.0 P hint is 1.0 it means
whenever they visit the hint State they
immediately know okay the left arm is
better
um but this doesn't have to be 100 right
the hint itself could have some noise or
uncertainty associated with it so we'll
parametrize that just with this
probability
um so this is
the probability of the two hint types or
the two game States and you see the null
has zero probability and then hint left
has more probably when the context is
left indicated by the column and then
hint right has more probably when the
context is right
and then we'll just go through and fill
out this Choice
um stuff oh you the reward modality will
have a similar thing a p reward so this
will determine the payoff structure of
both banded arms so if P reward is high
it means if the context is left is
better and you're playing the left slot
machine you'll have an 80 chance of
getting the reward
and this thing itself can be not changed
to determine basically how how rewarding
the bandits are
um
so this is the payoff structure uh if
you're playing the left arm the payoff
structure for the two contexts and
there's an inverseness that I didn't
discuss so if I'm playing the left arm
but the right arm is better
then I'm also more likely symmetrically
to get punishment or negative reward
with the same probability that I would
get positive reward if I was playing the
right on so just that that's also a
choice but just to make this a single
parameter that's how we we did it here
and then finally the choice observation
model is just filling out that GPS uh
High Fidelity GPS sensor
and that's pretty um
you know if you slice it along the
any context hidden State Factor since it
doesn't depend in context this could be
a zero or a one
then we'll get an identity mapping which
just allows them to infer their choice
state
and then we wrap this all into one
function so we just have two parameters
P hint P reward and then we can see once
we start doing simulations how
manipulating those things messes with
their behavior
so now we'll move on to the B arrays
um oh yeah so let me go here and talk
through some slides this will be quick
the bras are pretty simple so we're
gonna mess with this later but we're
gonna start by saying that
the context hidden State factor is
stationary over time so they can't
change that end State factor and even in
the absence of their ability to
intervene it it uh it stays in the same
state over time so we parametrize this
with like a p change probability that
just fills out the diagonal of this
um kind of trivial transition Matrix
with 100 probability but later on we can
mess with that parameter and decrease it
so they believe that the context can
actually change with some stochasticity
over time
um but for now we just assume they don't
believe the context changes
and uh and then this is their ability to
so unlike grid world where you have
local actions they can only move up down
left right here they can move from any
other state to any other state so this
is like a signature thing if you want a
controllable
um hidden State space so the agent can
go anywhere from any other place that
will manifest as these dark bands in
your in your B Matrix or bands of 100
probability so this is another way of
saying that the transition graph is
fully connected that you can get
anywhere from anywhere
um but that's also not sure like we
could have made it such that they once
they leave the start State they can't
return there so that would correspond to
having
um the absence of one of these uh uh
like basically the start state is a
source but it can't also be a a sink or
if there's no uh in arrows going to it
so that would affect the structure of
this
okay and then we can quickly code that
up
um so b0 is the context in state which
as we said is just going to be
stationarity
and then the choice given state is it's
fully controllable and then we will
parameterize this all as a create B
function which will for now have this P
change thing so we can make the agent's
belief about the stationary of the
context
um different like if the context is
likely to change but for now by setting
it to zero it just means that they
believe the context is fixed for a given
uh trial or set of time points
and then finally very basic stuff this
is just how we establish the semantics
of the reward modality so the reward
modality is as we said the null the loss
and the reward and we can encode the C
Vector which is kind of like the reward
function
um the prior preferences or prior over
observations
directly in terms of the log relative
log probabilities so we can encode
punishment by having the prior
expectation about loss be much lower in
relative log in in Nats natural log
units much lower than the reward
observation within that modality and
then the other ones are just going to be
uniform distribution so you can leave
them empty
and this is just what allows them to
want to see reward as opposed to loss or
punishment
and uh yeah so just as I think we
discussed this last time
um Daphne had a question about that so
why do we encode things in relative log
probabilities rather than Shear
probabilities is just more analogous to
the reward construct from reinforcement
learning that's one benefit so and
they're unbounded you don't have to they
don't have to be bounded between zero
and one so if you just encode them that
way it becomes easier to kind of make
one thing x times more rewarding or
punish or aversive than another thing
and that directly relates to how kind of
reward is calculated in our expected
utility of the expected free energy is
because it's always kind of an expected
it's kind of like an entropy or a cross
entropy so it's always
um it's you its units are in in natural
log space
okay so yeah
um and then the D Vector again they can
have prior beliefs about which context
is better so that will also be a
collection of vectors one over the
context factor and one over the
um the initial state of where they are
they are which we can make it start but
it doesn't really matter because they
have precise observations
and then that's very easy to do in Prime
DP
we'll just create some functions that
parametrize how rewarding the reward
observation is and how punishing the
punishment observation is
and then we can plot those and you know
this could be 10
and then the reward is much more
is much better than the punishment or
the punishment could be very bad
in which case the punishment is much
much lower than both the null and the
the reward and here I'm showing the
belief the the prior directly in terms
of probabilities so when you convert the
log probabilities to probabilities these
things will become bounded between zero
and one
okay and then the D Vector assembly will
just create a quick function that
parameterizes how much they believe the
left is better is the left is better
context is true at the beginning of the
simulation and if you just set that to
0.5 it means they have flat unbiased
uninformed prior beliefs about the
context
um yes okay
all right so now I think we are good to
actually do this after all the build up
um so like 95 of the work is in encoding
the generative model and this is
something Carl will tell you as well SPM
like most of the work is not actually
running active inference maybe
computation wise it is but in terms of
the time and the intellectual energy
spent it all comes down to the
generative model that's where all the
information is the rest is just
optimization basically
um so we've written down our a b c's and
D's then we just basically plug them
into this agent API from PI mdp and then
we
create an environment class which could
be as something as uh ad hoc as I'm
getting a list of observations from some
like API that's talking to the internet
or like from a robot sensors or you can
actually write down an environment class
that generates uh observations like like
another agent for instance
um and then you plug the observations
from the environment into the in first
States function you do infer policies
and then you sample an action according
to the expected free energy stuff that
we talked about last time
Okay so
now we're actually going to do this so
we have our nice Nifty functions for
creating a b c and d we can just run
those with desired levels of P hint and
P reward
and then create our agent
and um this is something we discussed
last time but an important distinction
is the generative model versus the
generative process or the environment so
the things we're putting in a and b
right now and and C are just the agent's
beliefs about for instance the hint
accuracy or the payoff Matrix of reward
that can be arbitrarily different from
the actual structure of the environment
and we'll see how later we'll see how
you can adjust the agent can actually
learn the correct reward statistics
through process of learning so even if
they start out with the wrong generative
model they can adapt their generative
model online so that they um they match
the generative process better
okay and then we'll Define this quick
class the two Arm Bandit which will be
the generative process the real world
for our agent we're not going to step
through the code but um the link is
available so if anyone wants to look at
this this is basically just encoding the
rules of the game so when the agent is
in the left arm they'll get reward or
lost depending on
the P reward and P hint values and as we
said these values can be different than
the agent's beliefs about them which
will be in their a matrix
so this is the generative process the
actual reward and then the generative
model are
the parameters you give to the a
Constructor
and then we'll just have a function here
that runs the active inference Loop it
looks a little bit more complicated than
those three lines I showed on the slide
but that's just because I'm storing
things like the history of their choices
the history of their beliefs
um I'm having optional plotting of
beliefs things like that and plotting of
actions
but this function basically that the key
Things Are
you get an observation from the you
start with an observation which it will
be from the generative process you do
hidden State inference using that
observation to get your posterior over
hidden States
and this you can return if you want to
plot it but you don't have to and then
you'll do inference about policy so this
is optimization of a posterior over
policies which then gets translated into
a marginal posterior Over Control States
or actions that you sample from
and you sample from them if this next
line with sample action so the main
three lines of any active inference
process are inference
about States inference about policies
and then action selection which can be
either deterministic or stochastic
depending on your application and then
the rest is just basically code that
converts observations
from the generative process into like
the terms that the agent can understand
and vice versa
and then we have this helper function
that plots the history of choices and
beliefs in the true context over uh over
time
so yeah I just Waze through that quickly
because it's not very important but we
can if anyone has questions we can go
back and dissect that code a little more
um
so now all we have to do is to find the
oh yeah you have your hand up you'll ask
something uh yeah
um maybe
um maybe this is better better suited
for
um for the end but
um in Prime DP there's also modules that
are adjacent to the Asian class
uh so I was just wondering how you um
how we could make use of the different
modules in the action perception Loop
um because I haven't I haven't seen many
examples of uh
of using for instance the inference
module or the learning module and how
that would augment
the Run active information yeah that's a
great question um so I have another demo
that we can maybe do another time that's
uh building a hierarchical model in pi
mdp so building a two layer model it's a
visual foraging hierarchical model based
on a paper that we did back in 2018 2019
and um and there you you're in this
inner loop over time you're doing you're
making use of these sub-module functions
so say you wanted to do some special
kind of inference
that's not just the standard in first
States
you could actually say Okay I want to do
this particular weird thing that's
specific to this inference process and
you would just add lines here
um like I want to take a function from
the inference module and run like I
don't know a different kind of message
passing on it
um like we're on to MMP or something
inference dot or that there's an Algos
module too that has different message
passing algorithms and then you could
optimize your hidden State beliefs using
that message passing algorithm and then
set them uh equal to the the like
special thing you did just just with
that
oops
so yeah there's no examples here but
um I haven't done that here but it's
definitely something that can be done
um
or yeah there's another example I did
like simulating an active inference
equivalent of an Evidence accumulation
drift diffusion style task where the
policy selection was done in a
particular way where you're only using
certain components of the expected free
energy
and uh and yeah so so basically there's
other demos where you can like zoom in
and not use the agent class and use sub
modules but I haven't written
those in like a publicly accessible way
yet but I can the hierarchical one I can
just easily make public I just haven't
had time to put it on the docs yet but
yeah that's a good question because yeah
you're right most of the stuff right now
is just the highest level implementation
with the agent
um okay
and now uh that to just run the active
inference process we just I've made a
distinction between generative process
parameters like how accurate the hint is
how uh how the payoff structure is and
then generative model parameters which
are used when creating the a matrix so
the P hint end is the true hint accuracy
P reward end is the true payoff and then
just choose some time Horizon and run
the active inference loop with that time
Horizon
and then plot the history of beliefs
okay so here's an example
um the top plot shows the agent's
Behavior so white squares indicate what
it was doing
at any given time so time is on the
x-axis so you can see it start in the
start State then it gathered information
at the hint
and the reason this wasn't immediate is
because it's beliefs about accuracy were
only 0.7 so it needs to actually do some
evidence accumulation before it's sure
what the state is then it played right
but as soon as it played right because
that's what the hint was telling it as
soon as it played right it probably had
a a loss
um
a loss observation which then messed up
its inference and made it go back to the
hint to accumulate evidence again before
being okay the hint is really suggesting
that I should go right so then it goes
back revisits the right arm and then
over time you see here the Red Dot is
the actual true context and the
grayscale indicates the agent's beliefs
about the hidden state
so here
um the hidden State beliefs are now
converging to
believing that the right arm is better
and I know I said at the beginning that
all probability would be darker means
higher probability but it's actually the
opposite here so sorry that's confusing
um so yeah right better is higher
probability
and their beliefs get more and more
confident as they play so this is you
know this this is the exact same thing
you'll see with the teammates right they
first
forage for information that's driven by
this epistemic value component of the
expected free energy as their posterior
over hidden States becomes more precise
epistemic value goes down and then
um the expected utility component goes
up which is bolstered by the fact that
they now have confident beliefs about
the context and then that drives them to
forge information
um and then so like that kind of
exercise that I would have people do if
this was like in a classroom context is
start messing with
the Bandit probabilities and also mess
with the agent's sensitivity to
punishment so up here we made them have
plus two relative Nets in their reward
function and minus four for punishment
but if you made this even lower let's
say it made it negative six
what would happen
so now because they're more risk-averse
the um the risk of getting a loss
observation if I was to play immediately
becomes higher so now the agent
basically requires more confidence
before it's willing to actually play the
left arm because the risk of getting it
wrong and getting a loss is too great
because their reward function is now
shaped more risk adversely
and then if I like decrease this even
more
down to negative eight you can see that
they never even go for play
because even once they're very certain
that the left arm is better it's still
too risky
given their beliefs about the payoff
structure
because there are beliefs about the
payoff structure are such that they
believe that there's still a 20 chance
that they'll get lost but if we change
this and said what if their P reward was
1.0
or say 0.99
then they're willing even despite the
great risk of being punished
because the the expected reward given
you know the context is high enough
they will still end up
um risking it and they acquire the hint
for some time and then they start
risking it
but they're the observations will
because peer reward is so high their
their beliefs about the payoff structure
their beliefs will kind of oscillate as
the observations actually change because
the true observations are generated much
more stochastically because this is the
peer reward of the Bandit
so you'll you can mess around with this
and and like I would encourage if anyone
listening now or afterwards
um wants to mess with these parameters I
would encourage you to just go crazy and
mess with parameters and see what
different kinds of behaviors you can get
um yeah
okay so that pretty much wraps up the
main brunt of the tutorial
and let's pause there for questions
because I have additional material about
learning parameters that we discussed
last time would be good to
to
um get into because that's something
that's really under documented right now
with primevp so we can move into that
but I think we should first break for
some questions
awesome thank you Jacob if you want to
ask or Carl otherwise I'm happy to hear
about learning
cool
let's do learning and then we'll have
any closing questions at the end
perfect
okay
I'll have some quick slides so
learning under active inferences cast as
updating beliefs about the generative
model parameters itself so inference is
one thing inference is saying given my
generative model so my beliefs about the
the way the world Works what is the best
explanation in the sense of posterior
over hidden States and policies
that explains my actual data and you get
that by minimizing variational free
energy learning is much um becomes much
more complex but also more interesting
in the sense that if the agent's
generated model itself is wrong they can
change the generative model to also
optimize variational free energy so
learning and inference can kind of
cooperate to or sometimes interfere with
each other as we'll see to to minimize
variational free energy so the way we
have to start by doing this is now
treating the parameters themselves so
the parameters of the a array which are
categorical likelihood parameters B
array d-array C array those themselves
now become random variables over which
we can have priors and of course
variational posteriors
um so we can go back to our original a
or Palm DP representation so now what we
see is in this third column next to a b
c and d we have parameters that are
priors over
the categorical
um parameters of the a b c and d so a
natural
um prior for these sorts of categorical
variables is called the dear Schley
distribution which is a um it's
basically a conjugate prior for a
categorical likelihood distribution
that's why it's very nice and also the
values of its parameters have a very
nice intuitive
um feeling and interpretability to them
so now the agents will have priors which
are updated by this P of Phi at the top
um and Phi is just a collection of all
these dirichlet hyper parameters they're
also called or prior parameters and
these are parameters or priors over
random variables that themselves are the
likelihood distributions and priors of
the generative model
so we're just going to do a few
instances of learning today I don't know
if we'll have time to do b or d learning
we'll start with a matrix learning but
um
but the principle applies the same so
here's an example of a deer slate prior
distribution over some categorical
parameters so let's say our a matrix or
a array let's just say it's a matrix so
now the random variable itself are the
entries of the a matrix
a prior of over those entries is
something called a deer slay
distribution which is just a vector of
real positive real numbers and here
we've reshaped it so that it has the
shape of an area so let's say this array
represents like the payoff Matrix in our
Bandit task so the two columns are two
possible hidden states are context one
context two and then the two
observations are punishment and reward
so if this is our prior which is
measured by these deer slay
um parameters
the likelihood distribution that they
parametrize also you can express this as
the expected value of the dershland
distribution is a categorical with these
values so what you can see is that the
deer Chalet
um counts like the the num the kind of
scalar magnitude of the deer slate
parameters kind of represent a prior
confidence about the probability of
um of the different contingencies
encoded in the a matrix so I made these
these very simple
um here like the the gear slave priors
are not nine counts for seeing
punishment given context and one count
for seeing reward given context one but
you can change those to very very high
numbers so for instance if that 9 on the
left was changed to a ten thousand then
on the right the probabilities would
become like 0.9999 to
.0001 so the scale of the deer slay also
known as pseudo count parameters encode
something like a
belief about how many times that
particular Coincidence of observation in
Hidden state has been observed which you
can also think of as like a prior
confidence about that contingency
um and the expectation to create your a
matrix via this uh going from a deer
slate to an a array is very simple
because you just take each deer slate
count and divide it by the column wise
sum which is this a naught variable on
the lower right so it's just that
particular value of the the a array and
divided by the sum of the counts
um so that's how you go from a deer site
prior over a categorical likelihood
distribution through the expectation
um and then inference and I'm not going
to get into like the variational
posterior but it's very simple so when
you're doing learning and you're trying
to actually update these deer parameters
as a function of observations what
essentially you have is a new posterior
that's not now not over hidden states of
the world but you have a variational
posterior over the parameters the
categorical or rather a variational
posterior over the deer Schley
distribution the deer distribution that
parameterizes your a matrix so that's
what's representing the lower right so
let's assume that our beliefs about the
deer shlay parameters were as it is now
so your beliefs about the a matrix
and then we get an observation
and let's say that we saw the
observation of punishment
and that can be represented by this one
hot vector
now we want to update our beliefs about
uh the a matrix given the observation
but what to do that what you also need
is a hidden state or a belief about
hidden States and let's say that the
agent uh was very confident that the
hidden state was context one
what ends up happening to the resulting
posterior over the a matrix
is a very simple associative
quasi-associative learning rule where
the update to the a the deer slay
represented by this um bold a Sub-Q
becomes the prior over the deer slight
parameters plus the outer product
between the observation vector and the
hidden State belief Vector so this is
kind of like a form of coincidence
detection where you just see what parts
of the Hidden States line up with what
parts of the observations and you
increment your beliefs about the a
matrix accordingly so in this case if I
really believe the context was one and I
saw a punishment then my belief about
that particular contingency
seeing punishment under context one
would just be incremented by a plus one
and that's what this outer product at
the lower right calculates it computes a
matrix that is the increment to your
beliefs about the a matrix so in this
case The Matrix would be have one in the
upper left and then zeros in the other
three entries and you use that to kind
of increment your your a matrix
technically you're incrementing a deer
Chalet kind of conjugate prior over your
a matrix but it's a very a variational
it's really a variational dirichlet
posterior
but you can imagine if your hidden
states are also contaminated with
uncertainty so say you had uh 50 your 50
50 whether it was context one or context
two then similarly with this a matrix
update the update would then be spread
over the two
um possible contingencies so if you saw
an observation but you weren't sure what
the hidden state was then both that the
just the overall probability of seeing
punishment under your generative model
would go up because you would increment
that entire row of the a matrix within
this case 0.5
so that's just an important thing to
note is that uncertainty in your own
hidden State beliefs will bleed into the
updates to the dirichlet parameters
and oftentimes alongside uh I mean it
optimally alongside a matrix learning or
parameter learning you're also going to
be augmenting your expected free energy
because your generative model is now
different so you have these new priors
and posteriors with a so-called
parameter Information Gain term or a
novelty term so while you're pursuing
learning it also makes sense to choose
your policies such that you'll maximize
um a kind of the information you get
based on the consequences of your
policies about the parameters of the
generative model so this this expected
KL Divergence exactly quantifies how
much a given policy will lead to a a
good Bayesian update of your parameter
beliefs so intuitively this quantity
might be um
described as how much do I expect the
consequences of my actions will update
my beliefs about parameters so
consequences of actions is represented
by that Q of O given Pi the thing that
the uh KL Divergence is taking taken
under expectation of
and then the actual KL Divergence is
saying how much surprise will I get
given these observations
um relative to my current beliefs about
the the parameters of the generative
model so this is what's called the
literature of the novelty term
and it's very easy to experimentally
turn off or on this novelty term
using simple Flags in in the agent class
and this goes for the other components
of the variation or the expected free
energy as well you can kind of turn on
flags that say do I want to use this
novelty or parameter information game do
I want to use the state info gain which
is the same as the epistemic value or
the Bayesian surprise and then do I want
to use the utility so for the learning
simulations it makes sense if you're
doing learning to have to make sure that
this parameter is turned on
um yeah okay so that's that's the kind
of um slides on on learning and now we
can actually get into implementing this
in primevp
um so
we first will create an a matrix and
we'll let the agent have very slight
positive beliefs about the reward
contingencies
and I'll explain later why this helps it
helps with learning if they don't have
total ignorance about the reward
probabilities but they have some bias in
some direction it doesn't actually have
to be 0.51 it could be the other way
um and then there's utility functions
that allow you to create dearishly
variables that have the same shape as
some base a array
so here we this pa
um
variable is basically the prior that
bold a sub P variable that represents
the agent's dirichlet prior over the a
matrix so this is now a new variable
that we're going to pass in to the
um to the agent Constructor so if our a
matrix is like
let's look at the
um you know the
reward contingency
reward modality so that's A1 so this is
the agent's current beliefs about the
the payoff structure right so under
choose left and choose right those are
the two contingencies given the two
hidden States PA will have the same
structure
except that it'll have
those contingencies encoded in terms of
dear slay pseudo counts so if I made
them
made this pseudo count scale 10.
then they are very con or quasi like
relatively confident
that the payoff probabilities look like
this
but again these are not probabilities
they're deer slay parameters that
parameterize a um categorical likelihood
so you can use the normalized
distribution function to actually then
visualize the dirichlet distribution in
terms of actual categorical parameters
which so taking the expectation I.E the
normalization of the deer slate prior
will give you exactly this
so if I say are these two things the
same they should be the same
okay maybe down to numerical differences
they're not but
yeah
um okay so yeah that's how you
parameterize that so we'll create a
this is an important Point that's also
used in SPM often we want certain
contingencies to be unavailable to
learning so we assume these are
contingency that are baked into the
agent's beliefs about the world and
that's not adaptable so one way and this
is just borrowed from the SPM way of
doing it to encode that is to bake in a
kind of um
really precise confidence or very high
confidence that certain contingencies
are the case and you can just do that by
adjusting the scale parameter for
particular indices so for instance by
doing this
I'm just telling the agent that it it
essentially doesn't learn the
contingencies related to the null
modality
um
so for instance if
if you're in the uh start state it
believes with really high confidence
that you'll always get the null
observation and we just operationalize
that by creating very very high pseudo
count or dear slay priors over that
particular slice of the a matrix
um so that's an important point to to do
and then we'll just write all this stuff
so this prior account about the null
observations and then the scale that
determines their General confidence
outside of this this um null thing we'll
write that all into a function so that
we can then parameterize our PA
and then we now write a new active
inference with learning Loop where
instead of just uh storing the history
of choices and beliefs we also store the
history of their beliefs about the
dirichlet parameters
um and an important thing that you can
also do in primevp which is nice is you
can say
I only want to learn particular
modalities so when you're creating the
agent class there's a bunch of arguments
you can pass in but one of them is I
only want to be learning the reward
payoff modality right now
and this can change you could have them
learn the the hint accuracy as well but
by passing in a list of which of the
modality indices that you want them to
learn you turn off learning on all the
other modalities which normally in SPM
more or what we used to have to do in pi
mdp is you just have to turn up those
deer pseudo counts super high on all the
modalities that you don't want to learn
but um if there are other modalities
that you don't want to learn now you
just you can just pass in this list of
modalities that you want to learn and
it'll only focus learning onto that
so now I'm setting up an agent
as these particular beliefs
about the world via a and now has a
prior that it's going to update through
doing variational inference or learning
and then so we'll create the generative
model here including this new prior over
a and then we'll run the active
inference loop with learning which
involves creating an agent that can only
do learning on the payoff structure
modality so we want the agent to now
learn
which arm is best basically because it
doesn't know the payoffs and then also
to use parameter Information Gain to
motivate its decision
and there's another thing I forgot to
mention which is the learning rate which
is how much they increment their beliefs
about the
posterior
or about the a matrix using this update
row so there's something I didn't
mention there's often a learning rate
that's that's added here that basically
scales how big this update is
so that can be you know you can
experiment it depends on the on the
application how what what the scale of
that is going to be but the default is
one
okay
so in this in this example the agent
gets the hint for one time step
he's got the standard like negative four
punishment
and then it goes straight to the right
because it believes the
um the hint is accurate so it gets a
reward is right then it goes and starts
playing the right arm
and uh you see it's posterior beliefs
instantly go to right
and now so since what we've also spit
out of this active infant soup is the
beliefs about the
um a matrix in this QA hist posterior
over a history we can plot its beliefs
about the a
um the a matrix probability over the
contingency of seeing reward given that
I was in the right arm
and what you see is that even though
they start with basically 50 50 beliefs
as they gather observations
their beliefs about that posterior
probability over that particular entry
of the a matrix get bigger and bigger
an interesting consequence of this is
their beliefs about the left arm
contingencies don't change because they
don't ever experience that that um state
of the world
so that's like an interesting um what
you might call in uh in machine learning
like a
it's not really a bad bootstrap but it's
the idea of
um like selective sampling so you only
learn those contingencies
that are selective to the part of the
world that you're sampling so I don't
the agent doesn't know what that other
slice of the a matrix looks like because
it's never experienced what it's like to
be in the left is better context
and and playing the left arm so it has
no it's posterior beliefs about that
part of the a matrix remain the same but
you can see that over time its beliefs
start to converge to point a which is
what we set in the uh in the generative
model
this is just basic statistical learning
right it's just getting reward
observations over time and as it gets a
sequence of reward and Punishment
through this very associative basic
mechanism is just incrementing its dear
slay beliefs and what I'm showing is the
normalized IED expectation of those
beliefs over time so you get something
that's 0.8 but the actual dirichlet
parameters themselves will be growing
um like linearly in time effectively
depending on the observations they get
um yeah so that is just a basic learning
and then there's another thing you can
do which is
take advantage of this change
probability so now we allow the context
to change and this is one way to get
them to actually be able to explore and
learn more about both reward
probabilities in the landscape is allow
them to have
not only to make the environment change
but they also entertain
beliefs in their in their uh B Matrix
that the the environment can change so
you could use this to do B Matrix
learning as well by defining like a PB
variable but here we're just going to
have a matrix learning as we were doing
before I've changed a little bit the
parameters to make things like a little
more stable
um because sometimes you get weird
Behavior I mean that's something we can
play around with too so now they allow
the the environment itself can change
and they also in their B Matrix they
think the environment can change
and then I'll plot
uh the history of beliefs and choices so
now
they instantly go for
um playing the arms they kind of risk it
they don't the parameter Information
Gain actually outweighs the epistemic or
state information game they start
playing they gather observations but
they're not very confident about what
the state of the world is because they
only are getting information about the
hidden state from the actual sequence of
rewards and losses
and then eventually they go to the hint
because probably the utility becomes low
because they don't know what the reward
probabilities are and they're building
their own beliefs then they get the hint
then the hint is accurate so they have
very precise beliefs about the hidden
state of the world
and then the the world actually switches
so you see the Red Dot is the actual
switching statistics of the Bandit and
now they've kind of explored wolf band
at Arms while also updating their
beliefs about the
the bandits
and you see that their beliefs about
their left arm are kind of bad because
they they it seems like they probably
mostly gotten negative data while
they're in the left arm and they didn't
explore it very much
um and and yeah or no I guess at the end
they're exploring it quite a bit but
their their beliefs about it go down
because they have I guess a bad
experience with it
um yeah that's a left arm that's the
right arm but you can like keep trying
this and mess around with different
parameters and you'll get different
sorts of
uh beliefs
okay so here in this example there's
some switching going on the posters
aren't tracking very well until they
actually visit the hint and then their
posters start getting much more
um much more precise and then at that
point they can start making more precise
beliefs in this case
they ended up kind of doing poorly on
learning on both of them because the
true
the word probabilities are PA yeah
um but so everything I've talked about
so far is an example where learning can
often lead to sub-optimal outcomes
because it's done in an online fashion
so this is an interesting Point of
Departure between SPM and pine DP but I
mean you can do all the same things in
SPM that you can do in pi VP so here
what I'm doing is I'm updating the a
matrix every time I get an observation
so they do hidden State inference they
select policies
they select actions and then given the
last observation and the last hidden
State belief they do one step of
parameter inference and they use the
next a matrix that's what's handled in
this update a function of of the agent
class they update their beliefs about
the a matrix and they use that for
inference at the next time step
another way you could do this is you
could do an entire trial
and then update your a matrix at the
very end of all the time steps of action
selection and observation sampling and
then use that a matrix for another trial
so this is kind of the difference
between
um like a more em uh like a separation
of time scales em or expectation
maximization approach where given a set
of observations then I update my model
and then I go back and I do more trials
without updating my model but using the
same fixed one and then you can kind of
do that in epochs and that's typically
how it's done in SPM because you only do
parameter learning basically this part
outside this time Loop so you do it like
down here but then what you do is you
run multiple trials
and the the nice thing about that is it
kind of makes the a matrix updates less
um likely to in the moment bias your
action selection so for a given set of
time steps you're you're locked into
what your a matrix beliefs are and you
don't do the update until a set of time
steps has elapsed
and uh yeah so for the purposes of this
tutorial I just did this online learning
thing but as you can see that can lead
to actually weirdly sub-optimal Behavior
where they don't learn the true reward
statistics very well
and it depends on a bunch of things too
like the learning rate and you know
there's a I haven't explored this demo
as much as I would like but there's a
lot of interesting kind of side effects
like here they're actually learning very
weird statistics about the the Bandit
landscape like they start kind of
learning it well but then as their
observations keep going they don't they
don't actually learn very well here they
just avoid playing because they have a
bad early experience so this is an
example of like a bad bootstrap and then
they go and just play the hint because
they're too scared of anything else even
though they're hidden State inference is
perfect
because the hint perfectly tracks the
hidden state
so yeah there's it's just um this is
just a kind of meant to be an example of
what you can do with learning
um but there's there's going to be
examples where learning actually causes
sub-optimal Behavior but in an
interesting way
so here's an example where they actually
kind of are learning the correct reward
statistics things are starting to
converge to point eight for both Bandit
arms
but um but it's very stochastic as you
can see and I also chose action
selection to be stochastic
with deterministic I wonder what you
would get
um yeah yeah they're just Arc maxing the
expected free energy or Arc meaning so
hint is always the most
safest option given their history of uh
observations
if I can make one remark on that kind of
diversity behaviors that we're seeing
pi mdp and active inference are
providing us a space and a approach to
composable generative model construction
that we can then sift through and to
co-evolve with to find different
strategies and behaviors so active
inference or even any specified
generative model it's not an answer or a
solution for example to the explore
exploit dilemma we see this like
empirically right now active inference
is not in general resolving explore
exploit anygm in general is not
resolving explore exploit any
parameterization is not resolving
explore exploit even for one environment
it just is equivalent to saying like
well we have a linear model of
healthcare data so we've resolved the
health care issue and
um this really this really shows the
space that we build in and what remains
to be built
is so open
yeah absolutely yeah I mean because
optimality is not really a function of
what the gender model is or what the
algorithm is what's it's more guaranteed
to be optimal based on how analogous the
generative model and the generative
process are so if the gendered model is
a perfect model of the generative
process then doing Bayesian infants
inference with respect to that
generative model that is optimal for
like everything
but um but uh how you learn the
generative model that's what we're
seeing here if you learn the generative
model in online fashion it's not
guaranteed to learn the right to
generative model in many cases it learns
the wrong one
and this is something that a lot of
people in active inference world have
explored for instance nor Sajid who's
also a student of Carl's has explored a
lot the the limitations and the the
boundaries of parameter learning and
things like preference learning like
what if you were learning the C Vector
itself how can that be learned online in
an Adaptive way
um yeah and also Alec chance has that
paper action oriented models where
they're learning the B Matrix and in
that thing they're showing how the agent
learns kind of sub-optimal strategies
depending on its exploration of
parameter space
um but that also actually is kind of a a
one of the
benefits of active inference that paper
shows because it shows if you have an
agent that does have epistemic value the
model it learns of the world is like
better than agents that don't have
epistemic value but again that the
models are always action oriented
they're always based on what parts of
the full State space is the agent driven
to sample
awesome Jacob any closing comments and
then all the closing comment and then
Connor with the last word
yeah well thank you very much for the
great
um overview what particularly uh was
inter um I I found particular
particularly interesting was
um both how you touched on how it could
be modified uh with the action
perception look could be modified with
the other other modules even though uh
as you mentioned there would be more
opportunities to go deeper in that but
also on the on learning
um the
the duration parameters and I would be
interested to
um see how that uh also influences
planning uh like
if you would up if you would do like um
kind of pseudo update of your duration
parameters when you're calculating your
expected free energy as in what would I
uh I'm calculating my expected free
energy
whilst also taking into account that my
B would change on each in on each step
and uh how that how that changes like
the optimality of
the temporal depth that we do planning
with I think it's super super
interesting and really looking forward
to hopefully uh another model stream
yeah that's a um
okay is it okay if I quickly respond
yeah please please
um yeah that that's a very interesting
point that you just made about
um these this fictive or imagined update
whereas that I had a yeah this slide so
that term that novelty term in theory
that does capture exactly what you're
saying yakub is that this thing says how
would my dear straight parameters update
if I was to take this policy pie and
then I use that term to actually choose
where to explore next so if I turn on
the parameter information game term in
the agent class they'll much more
quickly skip that skip the hint and go
directly to sampling the bandits because
they're driven by novelty oh I want to
know what the reward probabilities are
so I'm going to go explore however when
it doesn't do and what I think you're
intimating with your comment is that
if I did like multi-step planning
two time steps in the future will I be
able to do my planning given how I think
I updated my parameters at the first
time step so that's what the equivalent
of sophisticated inference sophisticated
inference is saying how would I plan at
time step three given how I think my
beliefs would update up to time step two
and that's done right now for hidden
States but I haven't seen that done for
parameters and I think there's someone
like a student of Ryan Smith's uh is
working on that now
um is like this propagation of
counterfactual beliefs about how my
parameter beliefs would change in the
future
um and that's like that's like a really
cutting edge I think active inference
it's like not only novelty but how would
my like prospective sophistication about
how your own parameter beliefs will have
evolved by time Point T and then using
that to do planning for time Point t
plus one
um that's like a really sophisticated
stuff I think getting just even Bare
Bones sophisticated inference with
hidden State counterfactual stuff in in
Pine BP that would be a huge
accomplishment too and then of course
incorporating it to be more
um more uh with the parameter
sophistication as well and then another
quick thing is I can quickly show you
um an example of one of those other
oopsie
just while you're finding it the live
that that last discussion on
uh sophisticated planning
it's something that at the semantic
level we engage with every day what
courses should I take this quarter
so that I can learn what I don't know
today so that next quarter I'll be able
to make a better plan for which classes
to take so that in three years when I
graduate
but it's already phrased at the semantic
granularity that these models are
rapidly converging towards and they're
not converging towards it by scaling is
all you need they're converging towards
it with a factorized actually semantic
approach which is very exciting
yeah that's a great analogy it's like by
the if you were a naive active inference
agent without sophistication you would
never plan with like a 10 time step
planning Horizon you never plan to take
or let's say a three semester planes
Rising you never plan to take
multivariate calculus
in your third semester because you will
you would not have anticipated by the
second semester I now have enough linear
algebra to take I know that by the time
I finish the second semester I will now
know linear algebra so I'll be well
suited to take multivariable calculus
whereas what we as humans do is we do
have that parameter sophistication I can
plan as a freshman as a first year to
take in my third or fourth semester some
high Advanced physics because I know by
that time I will have the requisite
multi-variable calculus or whatever so
that's a that's a really nice analogy
that I never
I think that's a good uh a good example
welcome to active View
yeah exactly
um so here uh
I just wanted to show you Jacob um
here's an example of a hierarchy
hierarchical active inference demo I can
share this too it's another collab
notebook where we're exactly doing we're
composing to palmdps so there's like a
high level Palm DP
and then there's a low level Palm DP and
for example when you're doing a step of
updating the empirical priors at the
high level before you pass them down to
be empirical priors at the low level we
use the control module for example to do
get expected States or use the high
level beliefs the high level B Matrix
and then the high level chosen action to
propagate forward the next posterior
beliefs at the high level and then those
things themselves parameterize a low
level empirical prior for this faster
Palm DP that's going on at the low level
so this is an example where you're
composing like agent class calls like
this but you're composing them with
functions that are built from sub
modules and adjacent modules of prime DP
um so that's an example of the thing you
were talking about but yeah that's very
brief like we can get into that um later
on
in a different stream or something like
that yeah
awesome Yes uh dot three whenever the
time is right I'll I'll just give two
closing areas
again really
appreciate coming back on and sharing
this development in progress already
it feels more powerful and documented
than when we were in the dot one just a
few
weeks or months ago
I think two areas that are going to be
really exciting to discuss and see how
they're implemented and also the
plurality of ways that they're
implemented
the first area is structured learning on
cognitive models from the outside so as
a ethologist as a behavioral researcher
how do we do structure learning on
cognitive models
four systems that we actually know about
their cognitive architecture or not but
also the view from the inside in terms
of structured learning and metacognition
like how should I change the
dimensionality of my B Matrix or should
I turn on that flag to engage in this
kind of sophisticated inference so
structure learning on cognitive models
view from the outside View From the
Inside is one exciting area and the
second more experimental area is
statistical power analysis pre and
post-hoc statistical power analysis
along the lines of the design Matrix in
SPM
so that you put 15 time steps and 0.8.2
and punishment is for
and then you could sweep across
parameters and learn about how well it
did but if there was certain interfaces
analytical or numerical approaches to be
like yes with 25 time steps
we have this much of an expectation of
convergence or this differential in
rewards should be resolvable by an
Adaptive agent over this long
and just understand how long should
these experiments be because there are
such interesting results with One-Shot
learning and with being able to generate
someone's voice from just 10 seconds of
them talking or make a video of somebody
as a deep fake with just a still image
and so it seems like it's possible to
learn a lot from a little
and if we can learn a lot from a little
and have a semantic cognitive model
that would be quite great
absolutely yeah like
it's almost like hyper parameter
optimization on the landscape of active
inference models like how do I choose
the parameters of an active inference
model in a smart way
um yeah there's several methods for
doing that like yeah that we could uh
definitely explore
yeah data efficiency is the main main
thing like you said like making it so
you don't have to train it on a trillion
images like with a deep neural network
perfect and Dot 007.2 and whenever you
want to join you in any colleagues are
are always welcome to share the next
spiral in pi mdp development
awesome thank you so much again for
letting me come on and listening I hope
it was helpful
um yeah and I'm glad that it's recorded
it's really an amazing resource that you
guys are developing here so thanks again
thank you till next time bye
[Music]