## ZASG-rtkXDk

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Welcome.

It is ACT-INF live stream number 51.0.

This is the background and context first discussion for Canonical Neural Networks Perform Active Inference by Isamura et al.

It's October 26, 2022.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at some of the links on the page.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and we'll be following video etiquette for solo live streams.

head to ActiveInference.org to learn how to get involved with Active Inference Institute projects.

Today, it's the first of several discussions that we'll have on the paper, Canonical Neural Networks Perform Active Inference 2022 by Takuya Isamura, Hideaki Shimizaki, and Carl Fristen.

The video is just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

there will be an overview of the structure of the paper and then we'll go through many of the key points also just to disclaim there's many many other and better resources to learn about neural networks so i would very much welcome those with a technical

understanding of neural networks and or some of the more applied computational or uh otherwise aspects of neural networks it would be awesome to have them on for the dot one and the dot two because it was not an area i was familiar with and so hope that i can

hear more from the authors in our coming weeks and others i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california and this will just be a solo dot zero which i guess hasn't happened in a while uh in the making of this here's some of the generated art prompts area 51 active inference area 51 neural network area 51 active inference ants area 51 active inference neural network

Just some interesting images coming out of stable diffusion.

So as to some big questions that the paper is addressing and that one might be interested in to come to the paper, how can artificial neural networks be understood as generic optimization processes?

And what is the correspondence between neural dynamics and modern statistical inference methods?

Other big questions are about the history and next steps of the enmeshment of natural intelligence, e.g.

neuroscience and artificial intelligence, as well as of course, whether to even play into this kind of distinction at all and have different integrated intelligence frameworks.

and one paper where any of the authors or anyone who has uh kind of resonated with this work is recent by zador at all 2022 towards next generation artificial intelligence catalyzing the neuro ai revolution and so this is a bunch of authors and so it's interesting just to quote in terms of what

some areas of discourse are saying right now which is neuroscience has long been an important driver of progress in artificial intelligence ai we propose that to accelerate progress in ai we must invest in fundamental research in neuro ai so that's one way to read some of the developments that are happening in the paper we'll discuss what does it mean to be particular but generic that's a phrase used in the paper so maybe that's kind of a jumping off point

then how can active inference help us understand the past present and future here of the interface with neural networks statistics and neural ai here's the abstract

This work considers a class of canonical neural networks comprising rate coding models where neural activity and plasticity minimize a common cost function and plasticity is modulated with a certain delay.

We show that such neural networks implicitly perform active inference and learning to minimize the risk associated with future outcomes.

Mathematical analyses demonstrate that this biological optimization can be cast as maximization of model evidence

or equivalently minimization of variational free energy under the well-known form of a partially observed Markov decision process model.

This equivalence indicates that the delayed modulation of Hebbian plasticity accompanied with adaptation of firing thresholds is a sufficient neuronal substrate to attain Bayes' optimal inference and control.

We corroborated this proposition using numerical analyses of Mayes' tasks.

This theory offers a universal characterization of canonical neural networks in terms of Bayesian belief updating and provides insight into the neuronal mechanisms underlying planning and adaptive behavioral control.

Here is the roadmap.

I'll be driving on the right side of the road.

There's an introduction and a table with a glossary of different expressions used.

Then there's the results sections, which has first an overview of equivalence between neural networks and variational Bayes, active inference formulated using a post-diction of past decisions, canonical neural networks perform active inference and numerical simulations.

So they work on the interface between neural networks and variational Bayesian methods and start with a more theoretical,

and mathematical background, and then eventually present some maze simulations that are in MATLAB.

Then there's a discussion, and then the methods section is following the discussion.

And it has the subsections generative model, variational free energy, inference and learning, neural networks, simulations, and data analysis.

And I think that I have kept to the right color codes consistently from here on forward.

The black quotes are the direct quotes from the paper.

Blue quotes are related to perception.

uh orange for action complete class theorems and neural networks together in purple and then red is commentary and then the highlighting for red is related to um the variational methods but it's kind of red ish

okay the papers canonical neural networks perform active inference by the authors uh listed previously it's in communications biology from 2022. and the key aims of the paper are laid out well in the first paragraph so that's in black and other colors and uh here the red is just kind of

Getting into initial conversation with the paper and connecting a little bit more to some previous streams before we go more into the specifics of the paper.

The sentient behavior of biological organisms is characterized by optimization.

Biological organisms recognize the state of their environment by optimizing internal representations of the external environmental dynamics generating sensory inputs.

So that's the sensory recognition model.

In addition, they optimize their behavior for adaptation to the environment, thereby increasing their probability of survival and reproduction.

So that is bringing the entire active and inactive population

control theory, formal theories of action, action selections, planning, and planning as inference.

All of these action-oriented pragmatic turn type ideas come into play when this action orange aspect is brought in.

And it is slash must be slash should be, et cetera, oriented towards survival and persistence.

Otherwise, we don't see that kind of thing for log over appropriate definitions for thing and log, etc.

And this few sentences that the paper begins with summarizes a common theme in Act-Inf, which is that there's basically two pathways towards proficiency in the niche.

There's changing the mind, which is the perceptual and learning, and then there's changing the world through action.

And that kind of integration of inference, cognitive inference, whether it's perceptual or learning or other, and action as enacted is part of the act-inf formulism and shared with other areas.

This biological self-organization is typically formulated as the minimization of cost functions wherein a gradient descent on a cost function furnishes neural dynamics and synaptic plasticity.

So they are working with a framework where the way that this perception action flow

is tractable computationally, either just for our current computers so that we can implement simulations and data fitting, or whether more fundamentally like this is the computational context of action, they're suggesting there's a way to think of it in terms of a cost function minimization.

also note like minimization maximization in a way they're interchangeable because there's just sometimes negative signs that can flip them so it's the same energy and fitness landscape that is being navigated whether you're minimizing to the bottom of the bowl and thinking of action selection that way and inference or whether you're climbing to the top of the hill gradient descent gradient ascent they're both kind of two sides of the same coin

Two fundamental issues remain to be established.

Namely, so this is what the paper is saying.

They're filling the gap in literature.

The characterization of the dynamics of an arbitrary neural network as a generic optimization process

and the correspondence between such neural dynamics and statistical inference found in applied mathematics and machine learning.

The present work addresses these issues by demonstrating that a class of canonical neural networks of rate-coding models is functioning as, and thus universally characterized in terms of, variational Bayesian inference under a particular but generic form of the generative model.

This is maybe the only slide that has resources from too far afield from the paper.

Well, almost, a few more.

It's just on neural networks.

The search on a very common search tool resulted in five plus million results for what are neural networks.

And the first one was three blue, one brown.

from 2017 which is just a nice YouTube video as they very often make with these beautiful renditions and it's a very great video and there's many many others a neural network is a network or circuit of biological neurons and that is variously purely computational and or biological

map territory stuff.

And they can be thought of as nodes and edges, which are the firing rates and the connections between the biological neurons being modeled as weights between nodes.

a positive weight reflects an excitatory connection while negative values mean inhibitory connections and here is data coming in and ending up activating different neurons in this final layer so this is kind of doing inference in a neural net work and then there's an action part okay

The paper says variational Bayesian inference offers a unified explanation for inference, learning prediction, decision making, and the evolution of biological form, which can be considered over multiple timescales.

So this returns to the earlier theme of like perception, action, and

Persistence Within and Among Generations.

And the citations that are provided here for this are Friston, Kilner, Harrison, 2006, and Friston, 2010.

Both very classic ACDINF slash FEP papers.

Just to show one figure from each.

Here's from...

the first citation with the winged snowflake, where if the snowflake ends up being somewhere that's too warm, that's not able for it to maintain the structure, then it melts, melts into a dew, et cetera.

And it must be acting as if in one way or another, it's staying above that phase boundary.

That's how it's statistically identified.

It's how it's,

ontogenetically identified, functionally identified.

And then here is one of the kind of path setting figures in the Princeton 2010 paper with a tree of many different areas to connect to and formalisms to represent as, including probabilistic neural coding, Bayesian brain,

optimal control and value learning these three and others can be really seen at play in this 2022 paper uh the kind of inference variational bayesian methods use rests upon a generative model that expresses a hypothesis about the generation of sensory input

Perception and behavior can then be read as optimizing the evidence for a generative model inherent in sensory exchanges for the environment.

And that's the integration of perception and action within a single imperative in terms of if only computation.

And that is described more on this slide, which one can pause and read, but the rest of the quotes are from the paper.

One key formalism that I had no familiarity with before this paper and associated readings and conversations with Ali was the complete class theorem.

So it would be great for anyone who's familiar with complete class theorem to

help a little bit here, but here's some interesting things that I came across.

Crucially, from the paper, as a corollary of the complete class theorem, citations 19 through 21, any neural network minimizing a cost function could be viewed as performing variational Bayesian inference under some prior beliefs.

here are the citations 19 through 21 from 1947 1981 2013 and uh also found some interesting resources so quoting from this less wrong post linked here

dutch book defines belief as willingness to bet and money pump defines preference as willingness to pay this is in terms of the foundational arguments for a bayesian epistemological

worldview hope that's correct again it'd be good to hear from anyone who knows more here but in terms of different ways that one can consider the Bayesian proposition which perhaps these are even better to use than referencing any person's last name because the interesting thing will be the different

lenses that these different framings on bayesian probabilities

are interpreted as just like what a p-value is interpreted as in the frequentist world kind of analogously like a bayes factor interpretation so dutch book defines belief as willingness to bet and money pump defines preference as willingness to pay in doing so both arguments put the justification of decision theory into hypothetical exploitation scenarios which are not quite the same as the actual decisions we face

If these were the best justifications for consequentialism we could muster, I would be somewhat dissatisfied, but would likely leave it alone.

Fortunately, a better alternative exists, the complete class theorem.

So here's an image from that post.

Possible world states observation likelihood maps to the possible observations.

Hashtag A matrix.

Then decision-making rule, maybe probabilistic.

Action selection as inference.

A, possible actions.

Affordances.

And here, we commonly see the loop being closed from actions to world states, like through the B matrix, changing how the world changes through time.

And here, these are both going to be mapped to a loss function, L, a real valued score from taking an action A when the world turned out to be theta, realized theta.

So that's quite an interesting framing.

And there were some other useful posts online.

And from this ZHAT blog, the argument boils down to, if you agree with expected utility as your objective, then you have to be Bayesian.

In a nutshell, a strategy is inadmissible if there exists another strategy that is as good in all situations and strictly better in at least one.

If you want your strategy to be admissible,

It should be equivalent to a Bayes estimator.

Complete class theorems.

Only Bayes strategies are admissible and admissible strategies are Bayes.

So there's probably a lot of interpretations of this, but it seems kind of related to optimal control or Bayes' optimal inference, perhaps a little bit more keenly.

So these are some next two slides were contributed by Ali.

So if you, or if anyone familiar in this area wants to come on the discussion to be, great.

But Ali pointed me to this book, Fundamentals of Bayesian Epistemology,

by Teitelbaum 2022 table of contents shown here and some challenges and objections to Bayesian epistemology are listed which can be read and then also there's some quite interesting logical structures which can be read here in terms of their premise theorem and conclusion

in the areas of arguments for bayesianism being representation theorem argument for probabilism the dutch book argument for probabilism and the gradational accuracy argument for probabilism so pretty interesting

Back to the paper.

They wrote, we have previously introduced a reverse engineering approach that identifies a class of biologically plausible cost functions for neural networks.

Citation 22.

Previous paper of Isomura and Friston, 2020.

The paper was reverse engineering neural networks to characterize their cost functions.

the abstract shown here, but this letter considers a class of biologically plausible cost functions for neural networks.

Using generative models based on partially observable Markov decision processes, POMDP, we show that neural activity and plasticity perform Bayesian inference and learning, respectively by maximizing model evidence.

So this is a precursor paper from 2020 that is cited and foundational for the 2022 paper.

Here's some figures from that paper.

They have comparisons among a Markov decision process scheme and a neural network.

For example, a Markov decision process scheme expressed as a Forney factor graph based on the formulation in Friston.

So here is the Markov decision process as a Forney factor graph, and on the right side is the neural network.

with the hidden state sensory inputs and neural activity and some figures and concordances.

And they wrote, in this context, the neural network can in principle be used as a dynamic causal model to estimate threshold constants and implicit priors.

This reverse engineering speaks to estimating the priors used by real neuronal systems under ideal Bayesian assumptions, sometimes referred to as meta-Bayesian inference.

So they're laying out their research agenda and they're

much of the work is going to reference this earlier paper and other work and then there's also some new integrations and especially the maze simulation in this paper and probably more so let's find out referring to the earlier paper

This foundational work identified a class of cost functions for single layer feedforward neural networks of rate coding models with a sigmoid or logistic activation function.

We subsequently demonstrated that mathematical equivalence between the class of cost functions for such neural networks and variational free energy under a particular form of the generative model, which is similar broadly to what the 22 paper does too.

This equivalence licenses variational Bayesian inference as a fundamental optimization process that underlies both the dynamics and function of such neural networks.

However, it remains to be established whether the active inference is an apt explanation for any given neural network that actively exchanges with its environment.

In this paper, we address this inactive or control aspect to complete the formal equivalence of neural network optimization and the free energy principle.

So this earlier work was not including action.

And so this paper's key addition, as I understand it, hopefully, is that they bring action more formally into the model

And it'd be interesting to know what else is that change associated with or what else happens or doesn't.

Here's some more text about the approach that they're going to take.

And many of these details are going to be addressed later on.

Here's table one glossary of expressions.

So these will also be broadly addressed later on.

Maybe it's useful though, just to read the first one, a canonical neural network.

In this work, the canonical neural network is defined by differential equations of neural activity derived as a reduction of realistic neuron models through some approximations, which give a network of rate coding neurons with a sigmoid activation function.

In particular, we consider networks comprising a middle layer that involves recurrent connections

the output layer that provides feedback responses to the environment so some category of neural network architectures or anatomies physiologies whatever with sensory cognitive and action-like features in an environment or a generative process so the results section

They write, in overview of equivalence between neural networks and variational base.

First, we summarize the formal correspondence between neural networks and variational base.

A biological agent is formulated here as an autonomous system comprising a network of rate coding neurons, figure 1a.

So here's a small figure 1a, we'll see it larger.

based upon the assumptions which will be brought up later on in a different fuller form the update rule for the ith component of phi which is the internal states so the cognitive states and the output layer y so middle layer x and output layer y

These can be seen as the cognitive and the action selective aspects, which are the autonomous states in contrast to the particular states of the active inference entity, which is the whole blanket and the cognitive states.

So including the sensory states, but the sensory states can't be directly controlled.

However, action can influence them.

And so that's what closes the causal loop.

And that set of the particular states comprising the autonomous states, the update rule for the ith component of phi is derived as the gradient descent on the cost function.

So the change in that, bi sub i, is proportional to a derivative on the loss function.

This determines the dynamics of neural networks, including their activity and plasticity.

So L, common loss function.

O, observations, sensory states.

Bi, internal states comprising the middle and output layer, neural activity, that's the rate coding part, and synaptic strengths, W, the parameterization.

and other free parameters, including that, that characterize L. Then there's the output layer activity.

Y is determining the network's actions or decisions.

Delta.

O, X, and Y. Y is the outputting action, environment, generative process, hidden state, passing observations to the sensory, cognitive, active layers of the neural network.

And that is analogous

topologically to the variational Bayesian formulation in Figure 1b.

And so, left side, gradient descent on a neural network cost function L determines the dynamics of neural activity and plasticity.

Thus, L is sufficient to characterize the neural network.

And then, being shown next to, on the right side, variational free energy minimization allows an agent to self-organize

to encode the hidden states of the external milieu and to make decisions minimizing future risk.

Here, variational free energy F is sufficient to characterize the inferences and behaviors of the agent.

So, sentence structure, parallelism, and these two schemes or approaches being linked and applied is a focus of this area.

So neural networks are minimizing the cost function L. In contrast, variational Bayesian inference depicts a process of updating the prior distribution of external states, p of theta, to the corresponding posterior distribution, q of theta, based upon a sequence of observations.

And we see other familiar terms from discussions on variational Bayes, like minimization of surprise,

And there's some more model details shown here.

A few points are about choosing the family of distributions that one is doing variational inference with.

And that allows for the gradient update rules in that family of distributions to be made simpler.

for example, choosing a linear regression with an L2 norm, at the very least, you can say that it has a simple decision rule for being fit.

I'm sure there's like also counter arguments and other algorithms that are better and so on.

But just to say that a simple decision rule in a known family of distributions can often be good enough as an approximation, if not more.

Crucially, according to the complete class theorem,

from earlier, a dynamical system that minimizes its cost function can be viewed as performing Bayesian inference under some generative model and prior beliefs.

The complete class theorem, just goes on to describe it, ensures the presence of a generative model that formally corresponds to the above defined neural network characterized by L. Hence, this speaks to the equivalence between the class of neural network cost functions and variational free energy under such a generative model.

Equation one,

loss function on the time series of observations comma parameters three lines is defined as f the free energy function on the same o through time comma parameters so there's a

parallel being shown slash defined, wherein the internal states of a network phi encode or parameterize the posterior expectation theta.

This mathematical equivalence means that an arbitrary neural network in the class under consideration is implicitly performing active inference through variational free energy minimization,

And more is written, but this is one of many statements that will be made corresponding to correspondences between neural network loss function, generative model, act-inf, free energy minimization, and associated formalisms.

Note that being able to characterize the neural network in terms of maximizing model evidence lends it in explainability,

in the sense that internal neural network states and parameters encode Bayesian beliefs or expectations about the causes of observations.

In other words, the generative model explains how outcomes were generated.

However, the complete class theorem does not specify the form of a generative model for any given neural network.

To address this issue, in the remainder of the paper, we formulate active inference using a particular form of partially observable Markov decision processes, POMDP models, whose states take binary values.

So this is one of several simplifications, is one way to see it, or areas for later generalization.

Figure 2.

In this section, we define a generative model and ensuing variational free energy that corresponds to a class of canonical neural networks that will be considered in the subsequent section.

The external milieu is expressed as a discrete state space in the form of a POMDP.

Figure 2.

So to make figure 2 larger.

There's a lot to probably say about this figure.

I'll just note that the caption is informative and some of the highlighted lines.

It'll be awesome to have the author and other people who's familiar with some of the differences and symmetries between the, for example, bottom and top.

above and below the observations and also about the role of time and what these two risks are what is fictive causality here's more details on that pomdp

Then equation two.

This is in the section active inference formulated using a postdiction of past decisions.

So if it was a prediction of future decisions, it's the opposite, a postdiction of past decisions.

Hence, we define the generative model as follows.

P O delta S gamma theta, which is the model of observations, decisions,

observations, decisions, hidden states, risk, and theta.

Theta equals A, B, and C. Constitutes the set of parameters and more details are provided.

This is the familiar notation with some slight differences that'll be described.

And equation two reflects the factorizability

and the dimensions and the kind of computational tractability expression so that would be interesting to also learn about like under what conditions can this joint distribution be factorized under what simplifications or constructions

The agent is making decisions to minimize a risk function, capital Gamma.

That's on the bottom of figure two.

Fictive causality leading to this Gamma coming from that Gamma.

Equation three is shown, and to characterize the optimal decisions as minimizing expected risk in our POMDP model, we use a fictive mapping from the current risk gamma to pass decisions.

That's that retrodictive fictive causality.

Although this is not the true causality in the real generative process that generates sensory data, here we intend to model the manner that an agent subjectively evaluates its previous decisions after experiencing their consequences.

This fictive causality is expressed in the form of a categorical distribution.

So it could be other families, hypothetically.

But this equation three is describing fictive causality and this interesting sign.

indicates the element-wise division operator.

Also note throughout the manuscript, the overlying variable indicates 1 minus that variable.

So gamma bar equals 1 minus gamma, or it can be understood as the complement of a statistical probability.

Probability of A happening and the probability of not A happening in that one way.

Importantly, the agent needs to keep selecting good decisions while avoiding bad decisions.

To this end, equation 3 supposes that the agent learns from the failure of decisions by assuming that the bad decisions were sampled from the opposite of the optimal policy mapping.

Some more details.

And then, by convention,

Active inference uses C to denote the prior preference.

That's how we've seen the C variable in many models as preferences, prior preference.

This work uses C to denote a mapping to determine a decision depending on the previous state.

Herein, the prior preference is implicit in the risk function.

Due to construction, C

does not explicitly appear in the inference.

Thus, it is omitted in the following formulations.

So that's a key point about the notation of the variable C and something kind of maybe interesting to explore.

Equation 4, variational Bayesian inference refers to the process that optimizes the posterior belief Q of theta.

Based on the mean field approximation, Q of theta is expressed as, and here is the

factorization representation of the Q of theta, variational.

And another notation note.

Throughout the manuscript, bold case variables, such as bold s sub tau, denote the posterior expectations of the corresponding italic case random variables.

And some more details about the model.

For example, for simplicity, here we suppose that state and decision priors D and E are fixed.

So one could imagine they don't have to be, but for simplicity, they will be here.

Under the above defined generative model and posterior beliefs, the ensuing variational free energy is analytically expressed as follows.

Equation five.

This is a variational free energy, F, and recall equation one, that it is being connected to, juxtaposed with, et cetera, the loss function.

The gradient descent on variational free energy

updates the posterior beliefs about hidden states, S, decisions, delta, and parameters theta.

The optimal posterior beliefs that minimize variational free energy are obtained as the fixed point of the implicit gradient descent, which ensures that change in F with respect to the change in hidden state through time equals zero and some more definitions.

All of them are zero.

That one might be an O, but they're all zero.

and this is saying the ball rolls to the bottom of the hill in this gradient descent and when the rate of change is zero then that is a fixed point attractor like dynamic and that can be used as a way to incrementally fit statistical models like the loss function is used to incrementally fit neural networks

To explicitly demonstrate the formal correspondence with the cost function for neural networks, consider in the next section we further transform the variational free energy as follows.

Some details.

Using these relationships, equation five is transformed into the form shown in figure three.

See the method section variational free energy for further details.

In what follows, we demonstrate that the internal states of canonical neural networks encode posterior beliefs.

Here's figure three.

On the top from the caption figure three is the mathematical mathematical equivalence between variational free energy and neural network cost functions depicted by one to one correspondence of their components top variational free energy transformed from equation five using the Bayes theorem.

and

foreshadowing equation seven.

Using this relationship, equation seven is transformed into the form presented at the bottom of the figure.

So here's F, variational free energy, and L, the neural network cost function, and different elements as they're represented here

with some resonances and concordance and beyond which we can explore they're being shown to be equivalent and it was in the conversation preparing for this dot zero with dean where we saw this as some chromosomes

In this section, canonical neural networks perform active inference.

In this section, we identify the neuronal substrates that correspond to components of the active inference scheme defined above.

We consider a class of two-layer neural networks with recurrent connections in the middle layer, Figure 1a.

Those are those connections with loops recurrent in the middle layer.

The modeling of the networks in this section, referred to as canonical neural networks, is based on the following three assumptions that reflect physiological knowledge.

1.

Gradient descent on a cost function L determines the updates of neural activity and synaptic weights.

Method section, neural networks.

Assumption 2.

Neural activity is updated by the weighted sum of inputs and its fixed point is expressed in a form of the sigmoid or logistic function.

Assumption 3.

A modulatory factor mediates synaptic plasticity in a post hoc manner.

They write, based upon assumption two, which is neural activity is updated by the weighted sum of inputs and its fixed point, is expressed in the form of a sigmoid or logistic function.

Based on assumption two, we formulate neural activity in the middle layer and output layer, the autonomous states, as follows.

Equation six.

Without loss of generality,

Equation six can be cast as the gradient descent on cost function L. Such a cost function can be identified by simply integrating the right-hand side of equation six with respect to X and Y consistent with previous treatments, citations.

Because neural activity and synaptic plasticity minimize the same cost function L, the derivatives of L must generate the modulated synaptic plasticity.

Under these constraints, reflecting assumptions one through three, a class of cost functions is identified as follows.

Equation seven, loss function.

Awesome to hear somebody read this directly.

So there's a firing rate aspect.

that's related to neural firing in the short term, more perceptual aspect of function.

And there's a slower neurotransmitter, neuroglial factor mediated learning over perhaps a different timescale and with some different features.

And they're being included as a joint model of inference.

And here that is being connected to doing inference on action.

synaptic plasticity in neural networks so synaptic plasticity rules conjugate to the above rate coding model can now be expressed as a gradient descent on the same cost function l according to assumption one equations eight and nine showing that neural networks can integrate those modes of firing rate like and synaptomodulatory like

neural networks, cost functions, and variational free energy.

Based on the above considerations, we now establish the formal correspondence between the neural network cost function and variational free energy.

Using under the aforementioned three minimal assumptions, we identified the neural network cost function as equation seven.

Equation seven can be transformed into the form shown in figure three bottom using sigmoid functions of synaptic strengths.

So equation seven, loss function,

transformed into the form shown in Figure 3.

Bottom.

Hence,

Hence, this class of cost functions for canonical neural networks is formally homologous to variational free energy under the particular form of the POMDP generative model defined in the previous section.

We obtained this result based on analytic derivations without reference to the complete class theorem, thereby confirming the proposition of equation one, loss function and free energy.

This in turn suggests that any canonical neural network in this class is implicitly performing active inference.

Table 2 summarizes the correspondence between the quantities of the neural network and their homologues in variational base.

So 2

a great concordance table on the left side neural network formation on the right side variational bayes formulation so just like in figure three we had the two long lines then table two we have rotated 90 degrees

and the variables for different parts of these models are laid next to each other so what papers of neural networks can we make active models for is it already done or is there just one

script that needs to be done and then conversely what interesting variational bayesian models have interesting applications or some other value or information gain from being cast as neural networks or integrating neural networks into what had previously been

only analytical variational Bayesian models as well as the empirical data fitting aspect which is related that's highlighted by the authors

So in summary, when a neural network minimizes the cost function with respect to its activity and plasticity, the network self-organizes to furnish responses that minimize the risk implicit in the cost function.

This biological optimization is identical to variational free energy minimization under a particular form of the POMDP model.

Hence, this equivalence indicates that minimizing the expected risk through variational free energy minimization is an inherent property of canonical neural networks featuring delayed modulation of Hebbian plasticity.

okay brief second to view some image memes and take a breath and a stretch on the left side the top panel says every neural network is implicitly performing active inference question mark that's awesome

In the middle image meme, one simply makes a neural network and it is implicitly performing active inference.

Also question mark.

And then in the right image meme, there are two pieces of paper, neural network and implicit performance of active inference.

Corporate needs you to find the differences between this picture and this picture.

And here is the paper.

They're the same picture.

So the previous sections have successfully extended the variational Bayes meets inference neural network results from the 2020 paper with an action loop and a loss function only on the autonomous states.

So that was the conceptual and technical

feature that this paper brought in again it'll be awesome to hear the author describe it more and differently and then in this part of this of the paper they turn from that kind of analytical theoretical towards some numerical simulations in MATLAB

Here we demonstrate the performance of canonical neural networks using maze tasks as an example of a delayed reward task.

The agent comprised the aforementioned canonical neural networks

figure 4a thus it implicitly performs active inference by minimizing variational free energy so now some entity or agent is going to be constructed and numerically simulated to support some of the uh

aspects of their model and point towards utility in other settings so here's figure four simulation of neural networks solving maze tasks uh in part a there is the architecture of the agent sensory input layer o of t synaptic weights into the middle layer x internal states

and the output layer Y, decision action with risk gamma of T. The sensation comes in, a neural network, then outputs a decision.

There's some task that the entity must perform, which is

to move towards the goal from the start across this lateral maze.

So one could imagine that if it were just a hallway with no maze features, simple strategies would be very overfit, but effective, like always move simply towards the goal.

Whereas in more complex settings, which this is an example of, where there's uncertainty as well as many local optima.

So one has to sometimes take one or two or three or four or more steps or however many to get closer to the goal.

and sometimes may not know, for example, how long those backtracking situations are going to be and all these other complexities for which this maze example is symbolic of.

So maybe there's some interesting mythos maze connections and computational.

And here's some performance measures on the maze task with the neural network entity this way.

Before training, the agent moved to a random direction in each step, resulting in a failure to reach the goal position within the time limit.

During training, the neural network updated synaptic strengths depending on its neural activity and ensuing outcomes .

This training comprised a cycle of action and learning phases.

This treatment renders neural activity and adaptive behaviors of the agent highly explainable and manipulatable in terms of the appropriate prior beliefs, implicit and firing thresholds for a given task or environment.

In other words, these results suggest that firing thresholds are the neuronal substrates that encode state and decision priors as predicted mathematically.

Big if true.

Furthermore, when the updating of parameters is slow across these two now linked domains, parameters of the variational Bayesian autonomous state inference and the neural network loss function parameters, when the updating of these parameters are slow in relation to the experimental observations,

The parameters can be estimated through Bayesian inference based on empirically observed neuronal responses.

See method section data analysis for details.

Using this approach, we estimated implicit prior E, which is encoded by psi,

from sequences of neural activity generated from the synthetic neural networks used in the simulations reported in figure four.

We confirmed that this estimator was a good approximation to the true E. So that's also pretty interesting.

This is showing they don't just lay out this architecture and show that it's possible to fulfill this maze task with the best

whatever it's not a classification accuracy imperative alone they're describing that from empirically observed neuronal responses which is to say the experimenter's observation the sequences of neural activity generated from the synthetic neural networks used in that figure

Numerically, so statistically, that estimator was a good approximation to the true E, figure 5A.

So here's figure 5.

Estimation of implicit priors enables the prediction of subsequent learning.

So that's pretty interesting and will be great to hear what each of the axes are and what all the variables mean.

With this setup in place, they did some numerical validation and talked a little bit more about fitting data from this simulation model.

Here's the discussion section.

So the first paragraph of the discussion.

Biological organisms formulate plans to minimize future risks.

In this work, we captured this characteristic in biologically plausible terms under minimal assumptions.

We derive simple differential equations that can be plausibly interpreted in terms of a neural network architecture that entails degrees of freedom with respect to certain free parameters, e.g.

firing threshold.

These three parameters play the role of prior beliefs in variational Bayesian formulation.

Thus, the accuracies of inferences and decisions depend upon prior beliefs, implicit in neural networks.

And here's some more stable diffusion.

Ant neural network, ant brain neural network.

So some more summarization of what they did.

Based on the view of the brain as an agent that performs Bayesian inference, neuronal implementations of Bayesian belief updating have been proposed, which enables neural networks to store and recall spiking sequences, eight, learn temporal dynamics and causal hierarchy, nine,

extract hidden causes 10, solve maze tasks 11, and make plans to control robots 12.

So citations 8 through 12 listed here.

In these approaches, the update rules are generally derived from Bayesian cost functions, e.g.

variational free energy.

However, the precise relationship between these update rules and the neural activity and plasticity of canonical neural networks has yet to be fully established.

We identified a one-to-one correspondence between neural network architecture and a specific POMDP implicit in that network.

Equation 2 speaks to a unique POMDP model consistent with the neural network architecture defined in equation 6.

where their correspondences are summarized in table two and the figures.

This means that our scheme can be used to identify the form of the POMDP given an observable circuit structure.

Moreover, the free parameters that parameterize equation six can be estimated using equation 24.

This means that the generative model and ensuing variational free energy can in principle be reconstructed from empirical data.

This offers a formal characterization of implicit Bayesian models entailed by neural circuits, thereby enabling a prediction of subsequent learning.

So what can be done with this?

What is this new?

What is new here?

Does this second selection

fully establish the precise relationship between these update rules and the neural activity and plasticity of canonical neural networks.

Here is a discussion section on Hebbian plasticity, neurotransmitters, and glia, with a lot of citations listed.

And here is just one interesting follow-on discussion from the computational aspects, neurocognitive and computational aspects of Hebbian plasticity, is these modulations have been observed empirically with various neuromodulators and neurotransmitters, such as dopamine,

noradrenaline, muscarine, and GABA, as well as glial factors.

So here's a picture by Alexandra Mikhailova.

Cultured astrocytes release signaling and growth factors that regulate proper neuronal development.

So cool glial pic.

Dopamine and reinforcement learning.

In particular, a delayed modulation of synaptic plasticity is well known with dopamine neurons.

Citations 35 through 37.

Those citations are listed here.

This speaks to a learning scheme that is conceptually distinct from standard reinforcement learning algorithms, such as the temporal difference learning with actor-critic models based on state action value functions.

Please see the previous work, citation 50,

for a detailed comparison between active inference and reinforcement learning.

That is Sajid, Bal, Par, and Fristen, active inference, demystified, and compared from 2021.

And that's also ACTIV model stream number 2.1.

We mathematically demonstrated that such plasticity enhances the association between the pre-post mapping and the future value of the modulatory factor, where the latter is cast as a risk function.

This means that postsynaptic neurons self-organize to react in a manner that minimizes future risk.

So the neural network had three layers.

It's the second and the third layer, not the initial sensory layer, but the second and the third layer, the cognitive and the active states, which are the autonomous states of the particular states.

So that's quite interesting.

The self-organization of postsynaptic neurons

to react in a manner that minimizes future risk?

Crucially, this computation corresponds formally to variational Bayesian inference under a particular form of POMDP generative models, suggesting that the delayed modulation of Hebbian plasticity is a realization of active inference.

And regionally specific projections of neuromodulators may allow each brain region to optimize activity to minimize risk and leverage a hierarchical generative model implicit in cortical and subcortical hierarchies.

This is reminiscent of theories of neuromodulation and meta-learning developed previously.

Citation 52.

Doya, 2002.

Meta-learning and neuromodulation.

Cool.

Our work may be potentially useful when casting these theories in terms of generative models and variational free energy minimization.

They then return the discussion to the complete class theorem and neural networks.

So the complete class theorem, same citations from before, ensures that any neural network whose activity and plasticity minimize the same cost function can be cast as performing Bayesian inference.

however identifying the implicit generative model that underwrites any canonical neural network is a more delicate problem because the theorem does not specify a form of the generative model for a given canonical neural network which is pretty interesting is that to say that the form of the generative model as modeled is different in what ways from the given canonical neural network

The posterior beliefs are largely shaped by prior beliefs, making it challenging to identify the generative model by simply observing systemic dynamics.

To this end, it is necessary to commit to a particular form of the generative model and elucidate how posterior beliefs are encoded or parameterized by the neural network states.

This work addresses these issues by establishing a reverse engineering approach to identify a generative model implicit in a canonical neural network, thereby establishing one-to-one correspondences between their components.

Remarkably, a network of rate coding models with sigmoid activation function formally corresponds to a class of POMDP models, which provide an analytically tractable example of the present equivalence.

Please refer to the previous paper, Cytation 22, for further discussion.

So some of the analytical details, especially on the inferential side, cognitive side,

burr captured in the earlier paper this paper goes further into mapping the

potentially necessary and sufficient aspects of the particular entity which is to say the risk minimizing features of the autonomous states with respect to the entire particular states including sensory states connecting that back of the envelope verbally expressible formulation to

some complete class of neural networks.

So what's outside of the complete class and why, and then what groups within the class have special or different features.

It is remarkable that the proposed equivalence can be leveraged to identify a generative model that an arbitrary neural network implicitly employs.

This contrasts with naive neural network models that address only the dynamics of neural activity and plasticity.

If the generative model differs from the true generative process that generates the sensory input, inferences and decisions are biased relative to Bayes' optimal inferences and decisions based upon the right sort of prior beliefs.

In general, the implicit priors may or may not be equal to the true priors.

Thus, a generic neural network is typically suboptimal.

Nevertheless, these implicit priors can be optimized by updating free parameters e.g.

threshold factors,

by psi, based on the gradient descent on cost function L. By updating the free parameters, the network will eventually, in principle, become Bayes optimal for any given task.

In essence, when the cost function is minimized with respect to neural activity, synaptic strengths and any other constants that characterize the cost function

the cost function becomes equivalent to variational free energy with the optimal prior beliefs.

So the cost function for the neural network activity and synaptic strengths underlying the loss function

are equivalent to the kind of gradient descent enabled variational free energy minimization under the base optimality scenario from a risk perspective

Simultaneously, the expected risk is minimized because variational free energy is minimized only when the precision of the risk, gamma, is maximized.

See method section generative model for further details.

Very interesting.

They then say...

The class of neural networks we consider can be viewed as a class of reservoir networks.

Citation 54, citation 55, here.

The proposed equivalence could render such reservoir networks explainable.

and may provide the optimal plasticity rules for these networks to minimize future risk by using the formal analogy to variational free energy minimization under the particular form of POMDP models.

A clear interpretation of reservoir networks remains an important open issue in computational neuroscience and machine learning.

So from Wikipedia, reservoir computing is a framework for computation derived from recurrent neural network theory that maps input signals into higher dimensional computational spaces through the dynamics of a fixed nonlinear system called a reservoir.

After the input signal is fed into the reservoir, which is treated as a black box, a simple readout mechanism is trained to read the state of the reservoir and map it to the desired output.

Then there's two key benefits of this approach.

the first key benefit of this framework is that training is performed only at the readout stage as the reservoir dynamics are fixed the second is that the computational power of naturally available systems both classical and quantum mechanical can be used to reduce the effective computational cost here's some stable diffusion reservoir computing active inference neural network

So this would be interesting to discuss, and I remember some Act-Inf Institute participants who are specifically interested.

Empirical analyses and hypotheses.

They write, the equivalence between neural network dynamics and gradient flows on variational free energy is empirically testable using electrophysiological recordings or functional imaging of brain activity.

So, then another summarization.

Crucially, the proposed equivalence guarantees that an arbitrary neural network that minimizes its cost function, possibly implemented in biological organisms or neuromorphic hardware, can be cast as performing variational Bayesian inference.

So, to state it a few more times in the final paragraph.

In summary, a class of biologically plausible cost functions for canonical neural networks can be cast as variational free energy.

Formal correspondences exist between priors, posteriors, and cost functions.

This means that canonical neural networks that optimize their cost functions implicitly perform active inference.

This approach enables identification of the implicit generative model and reconstruction of variational free energy that neural networks employ.

This means that in principle,

Neural activity, behavior, and learning through plasticity can be predicted under Bayes' optimality assumptions.

There's a code availability statement.

The MATLAB scripts are available at GitHub in the repo of the first author, and it would be awesome

the author or anyone to bring this working matlab script up and see if we could do some real-time active inference then as mentioned earlier from the roadmap the methods are following the discussion

i'll just show the equations but not go into any details because there's not time nor familiarity so those who have more of one or the other would be welcome to fill in some dots because this is a really awesome and important paper so i hope that it can be

interpreted and critiqued and elaborated on and so on by those with familiarity in both sides of that free energy loss function equation one

Generative model section.

Many details are provided.

Equation 10 is shown.

It's a larger unpacking of the generative model.

Section variational free energy.

Many details are provided.

Equation 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15.

Section inference and learning.

Details are provided.

Equations 16, 17, 18.

Then section on neural networks.

So there was just some interesting writing here.

So I wanted to highlight that.

In this section, we elaborate the one-to-one correspondences between components of the canonical neural networks and variational bays via an analytically tractable model.

So that's the figure three that we've been returning to.

Neurons respond quickly to a continuous stimulus stream with a timescale faster than typical changes in sensory input.

For instance, a peak of spiking neurons in the visual cortex of V1 appears within 50 and 80 milliseconds after a visual stimulation.

Citation 62-63.

which is substantially faster than the temporal autocorrelation timescale of natural image sequences, about 500 milliseconds, citation 6465.

So that's pretty interesting.

What is the temporal autocorrelation timescale of natural sequences?

What timescale do neural firing and neuroplasticity, etc.

processes actually occur at?

and when might some type of function at a given time scale be understood to be functional or not thus in other words downstream of the fact that neurons respond quickly

at a time scale faster than typical changes in sensory input, we consider the case where the neural activity converges to a fixed point given a sensory stimulus.

We note that the present equivalence is derived from the differential equations, equation six, but not from its fixed point.

Thus, the equivalence holds true irrespective of the time constant of neurons.

To rephrase, neural networks with a large time constant

formally correspond to Bayesian belief updating with a large time constant, which implies an insufficient coverage of the posterior beliefs.

Pretty interesting related to learning rates and Bayesian updating rates and all of the nooks and crannies of Bayesian inference and the challenges associated with dynamic, uncertain, rugged, fitness, and free energy landscapes.

these optimization challenges, which are addressed differently methodologically, culturally, et cetera, in the variational Bayesian and in the neural cases,

they have to deal with time and so all of those different nooks and crannies mentioned like catastrophic learning catastrophic forgetting simply memory anticipation attention local maxima choosing when to play all these higher order questions

are connected here does that make it what kind of a problem space now or just what kind of space pretty interesting and equation 19 20 21 22 23. they have some more details on the simulation

Maybe we could see the simulation go.

And in the last section, data analysis.

So this is kind of returning to that point about the time constants in Bayesian and neural network systems.

When the belief updating of implicit priors, D and E, is slow in relation to experimental observations...

D and E, which are encoded by phi and psi, can be viewed as being fixed over a short period of time, as an analogy to homeostatic plasticity over longer timescales, 66.

Homeostatic plasticity in the developing nervous system, 2004.

Very interesting in light of our recent discussions on allostasis and other topics.

Thus,

Phi and Psi can be statistically estimated by a conventional Bayesian inference or maximum likelihood estimation given a flat prior based on empirically observed neuronal responses.

In this case, the estimators of Phi and Psi are obtained as follows.

Nice equation number 24 mentioned earlier.

So that will be definitely one to look into more.

Well,

I hope you found this a useful and interesting .zero.

I'm looking forward to the discussion with the author and again any other Institute participants or those with knowledge or strong feelings to express about neural networks active inference applied active inference computational modeling of perception cognition and action

neural networks in the wild, AI ethics, all these different areas can hopefully have a nice discussion in 51.1 and 51.2.

That'll be the last paper streams for 2022.

There will still be a few guest streams upcoming.

So those discussions will close the paper

focused prepared live streams for 2022 and yeah if you want to be more involved with live streams whenever you're listening to this join or recommend someone to join or help in any number of other ways

Just listening and learning is awesome.

And we also really look forward to those who want to help make some of these connections that are latent and sometimes exposed in these papers and conversations.

and with a few motivated people who want to connect for example to the neural network communities and those who can facilitate discussions on these topics that would be awesome just using my final thoughts on this dot zero

because it's always great to have others also join in the preparation for the dot zero so just want to add that note on this rare solo stream so thanks again looking forward to talking or seeing you later bye

## IM_NlUzyq8M

SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Hello, everyone.

Welcome.

This is ACT-INF livestream number 51.1.

We are in the second discussion of this paper, Canonical Neural Networks Perform Active Inference.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us on this slide.

And this is recorded in an archived livestream.

So please provide us feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome and will follow good video etiquette for live streams.

Head over to ActiveInference.org to learn more about the Institute and how to participate in projects and learning groups.

All right.

We're in act-inf stream number 51.1 and having our first non-solo discussion on this paper, Canonical Neural Networks Perform Active Inference.

And really appreciative.

to you that you've joined today it's going to be a great discussion we'll begin with introductions i'll say hello and then please just jump in however you'd like and we can start by setting some context so i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california

And I was interested in this paper because we've been talking a lot about active inference from a variety of different perspectives, from the more fundamental math and physics to some applications, philosophy, embodiment, all these really interesting threads.

And this paper seems to make a really interesting

clear meaningful contribution and connection by connecting active inference entities and this approach of modeling to neural networks which are in daily use globally so thought it was a fascinating connection and really appreciate that we can talk about this today so to you and welcome

Go for it, Takuya, however you'd like to introduce and say hello.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh, yeah.

Hi, I'm Takuya Isomura, neuroscientist in RIKEN Brain Science Institute in Japan.

I'm particularly interested in universal characterization of neural network and brain using mathematical techniques.

So this work, I believe, is important as a link between active brain-influenced aspect, vaginal-influenced aspect of the brain, and the dynamic system aspect of the neural network.

So I'm very happy to join this discussion session.

Thank you for the invitation.

Nice to meet you.


SPEAKER_00:
Nice to meet you as well.

The first thing you added, the universal characterization of neural networks.

What is the universal characterization of neural networks?

Why is it being pursued in this area of research?


SPEAKER_01:
So as a narrow sense, my aim, main aim of this paper is that so, you know,

People use active inference formalization to characterize brain activity, behavior, so on, so on, but which would be different from a conventional neural network.

So there is a class of problem.

which is associated with conventional neural network.

And it is not very clear whether all characterization of conventional neural network can be explained by active inference free energy principle or not.

So here, universal characterization means that characterization of every aspect of conventional neural network

which is a kind of dynamical system derived as the association between a physiological phenomena and simple mathematical formula typically using differential equations.

As the broad sense, I think universal characterization means that, well, it is the characterization of brain intelligence, but it's a big picture.

And what the paper particularly addresses is only one aspect of the full picture.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

So it'll be great to pull back to really understand what synthesis is happening.

So I'm going to ask, what makes a neural network model a neural network model?

And what makes an active inference model an active inference model?

Is this synthesis and connection you've made true because of what?


SPEAKER_01:
because basically what we showed is the mathematical equivalence between the formulation

of canonical neural networks and the formulation of active inference, in the sense that we showed that a class of neural network can be characterized by a minimization of some biologically plausible cost function.

And we show that that cost function can be read as a class

variational Bayesian inference under a particular class of generative model in terms of well-known partial observer polymer composition process.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Shall we perhaps walk through some of the sections of the paper?

It would be awesome just for each of these sections,

maybe the numbered and the lettered sections, what does the section aim to show and why was it there in the paper?


SPEAKER_01:
So yeah, briefly.

It's an overview, right?

So briefly, so first we introduce the main issue, main problem of our interest, which is a relationship.

So we try to make a formal link between neural network and active rainforest.

That's the main

problem background.

And then we first formulate the equivalence, mathematical equivalence in a very broad manner.

So in the first section in result, we formulate the

the relationship using a complete class theorem, which is a well-known statistical theorem proposed very long time ago.

And using that, we link a general form of neural network with a general form of variational Bayesian inference.

problem is that this characterization does not address a specific form of generative model, which is crucial to characterize a specific model, specific neural network dynamics.

So in the following

sections, we characterize the problem using POMDP, or Partially Observed Grammar Conditional Process, and link that model with a particular class of canonical neural network.

And then we simulate it.

We use the simulation to

to corroborate that property in terms of some main tasks.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you for this.

Could we talk about the complete class theorem?

So what is the scope of the complete class theorem?

And why was it the relevant set of the neural networks to pursue or the right way to frame it?


SPEAKER_01:
Thank you for asking that.

I like the slide you showed in the last week's video.

Completed class theorem basically indicates the relationship between some class of decision rule and Bayesian inference.

Here, a crucial keyword is admissibility or admissible decision rule, which is a rule which is as good as other decision rules, or at least

at one point, better than other decision rules.

So, simply speaking, admissibility indicates, in some sense, it is the best rule for some aspect.

And usually we characterize such a goodness using cost function, loss function, or risk function.

And here, what we did is establish some association with this type of loss function or risk function with a function of canonical neural network, which we call cost function or biologically plausible cost function for neural network.

Our assumption is that neural network minimizes cost function.

If it achieves the minimization and it is obviously achieves some sort of optimality, we can say it is admissible with respect to that cost function.

The beauty of complete class theorem is that if we find some admissible decision, then automatically we can say that it is Bayesian inference in terms of some Bayesian cost function with generative model or prior beliefs.

So this complete cross theorem is crucial as an abstract characterization of the relationship between conventional neural network architecture dynamics and variational Bayesian inference.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Thank you.

What does it mean when you said it was biologically plausible of a loss function?


SPEAKER_01:
The term is a little bit arbitrary because in this paper, we mean by biological reproducibility in the sense that this neural network model can be derived from realistic neural model through some approximation.

Here, biologically plausibility suggests or means plausibility as a neural model or synaptic plus system model.

And if this cost function, loss function can derive such a plausible algorithm, then we can say that this cost function is biologically plausible.


SPEAKER_00:
So what is the distinction between those neural and synaptic components in the loss function, or what equation to look at?


SPEAKER_01:
You mean distinction between neurodynamics and synaptics?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, what is the distinction between them and how is it represented in the equations?

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
Basically, neural activity equation means a differential equation about a variable that represents firing intensity or some sort of variables associated with neural firing.

On the other hand, synaptic elasticity equation means an update rule about the synaptic weight or synaptic strength, which is a connection between two neurons.

And the beauty of this formulation proposed in this paper is that we characterize both neuroactivity equation and synaptic plasticity equations in terms of gradient descent on a same cost function, a common cost function.

So we can say that

If we consider the partial derivative of some cost function with respect to neural activity, then it derives a gradient descent rule about neural activity.

While if we consider partial derivative of cost function L with respect to synaptic weight, then we derive a synaptic plasticity rule.


SPEAKER_00:
Are those the only two aspects of a neural network or why are those the two key aspects?


SPEAKER_01:
It is a main character.

I think it's a main body of the neural activity if we consider some inference running or action exhibit by neural network in the sense that

neural activity correspond to fast dynamics, fast gradient dynamics.

And while synaptic plasticity indicate a slow dynamics that minimize risk function, cost function.

But in general, we can consider any aspect, any variables associated with neural network.

For example, at least what we show in the paper is that

any free parameter which may be associated with firing threshold.

Although we don't discuss in this paper, it would be possible to add other

variables related to neural network for example we here we ignore contribution of real factor but it will be possible to add the real factor in this formulation or any other aspect of virus called neural network


SPEAKER_00:
That's very interesting, and it speaks also to a general separation of time scales.

For example, in different multi-scale systems or in the renormalization group, where it's describing some minimal multi-time scale system

where the faster timescale can be seen as perception like a slower timescale can be seen as more learning like, and then in some hierarchical model, what's learning of one timescale can be perceptual for a slower timescale.

So it's a very nice generalization.

Are there any examples of decision rules that will help us think about the action components of what the neural network is doing?

Because it may be more familiar to think about digit characterization and image classification, some kind of classical tasks for neural networks.

But how does the decision rule play out in the context of neural networks?


SPEAKER_01:
In this paper, we basically assume a closed loop, comprising a neural network part and an environmental part.

Neurons receive sensory input from the environment and provide some feedback to the environment.

Yeah, even with the example of digit classification, we can say that output corresponds to classifier classification output, which is kind of decision rule.

More relevant

example would be, for example, controlling agent, like a robot control, or any kind of controlling or decision making tasks.

For example, when we encounter some choice task, we need to advertise, for example, left or right, or something, any kind of such a

decisions can be associated with the admissibility or admissible decision rule.


SPEAKER_00:
So what would an example of an inadmissible or admissible strategy be in the decision-making task?


SPEAKER_01:
Admissibility

usually characterized by loss function or risk function so if

so here in admissibility indicate that this there is another decision rule which is uh at least one point better than uh the the the forecast decision rule so yeah simply speaking in other visibility indicate that it's that that decision rule is not

better, not good, relatively.


SPEAKER_00:
But let's just say our decision rule is we always turn right.

is that an example of a decision rule because there might be settings where that is strictly effective and the simplest rule whereas there's other settings where that's going to be tragic so what does it mean to be admissible for an agent in light of different environmental contexts


SPEAKER_01:
That's an interesting point.

So even with such a two-month simplified rule, it can be admissible under some particular situation, particular loss function.

For example, the rule that always turn right may be the best under some situation, right?

So the relationship of admissibility or inadmissibility depends on both agent characteristic and the environmental characteristic.


SPEAKER_00:
What aspects of the environment


SPEAKER_01:
For example, if that decision rule matches the structure, architecture of environment, then maybe that decision always turn right, achieve the shortest path under some situation, some environment.


SPEAKER_00:
How does this admissibility help us think about like overfitting?

And how does it help us think about the way that different practices are used for neural networks to prevent them from being overfit in practice?


SPEAKER_01:
Well,

Well, strictly, admissivity is characterized with the Bayesian risk.

So we cannot observe a hidden state of the environment.

Only we can observe a part of the entire

So, the question is, important question is, what is the best choice under such a limited information?

Yeah, information.

So, this Bayesian list idea or admissibility or complete crest theorem,

tell us that well-known Beijing

Only the well-known Bayesian framework achieved the admissibility, admissible decision, which means that in this aspect, Bayesian optimizations give us a best-of-choice strategy.

Otherwise, we overfeed for

would find the suboptimal solution.

So it's a nice association, nice linkage between the decision, what is a good decision, and more established statistical inference, Bayesian inference framework.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

That's very helpful.

So we're reducing our

uncertainty and risk about hidden states in the environment so in the special case where the entire environment is observable without error like a chess game then there's an equivalence between calculation of risk or loss on observables or on hidden states but they're not really hidden but they are environmental states

Whereas any amount of uncertainty in the mapping between observations and hidden states, which is usually shown as A in the partially observable Markov decision process, any amount of uncertainty about unobserved or partially observed environmental states

enables you to fit your uncertainty optimally about that hidden state and fit that uncertainty simply with a gradient descent and by doing so you don't overfit a model of observables which might be the fallacy or the issue with simply doing descriptive statistics

you might get an infinitely small variance with a frequentist estimate because you have 100,000 data points.

So the variance from a descriptive statistics perspective might be very small.

I think it speaks very much to why neural networks are useful in practice from training with limited data sets

Because that's an empirical observation that they don't entirely overfit.

But also I'm sure there's ways to construct them that are overfit.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Overfit would occur if we select some optimal prior beliefs, for example.

Well, I'm not sure if...

it is an overfit in the sense that you mentioned.

Because if we select some prior wave, then the Bayesian function itself changes, and the neural network tries to fit to that cost function.

So cost function minimization would be achieved in such a situation, but that solution is not

good for our, you know, original purpose.

That's a tricky part.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that is reminiscent of some discussions we've had discussing like driving off a cliff or blowing up is also reducing free energy, like dropping off a building reduces your potential energy.

And so there are potentially decision making or strategic trajectories

that do for some time horizon minimize free energy.

Perhaps even, or maybe even guaranteed better than some longer time horizon.

Because if the short-term strategies were somehow better than the long-term horizon, it would be difficult to imagine because the long-term horizon would be at least as good as a short-term strategy.

So that speaks to the challenges of planning

in action.

So how is planning addressed in modern neural networks?

And how does this work help us think about that?


SPEAKER_01:
That's another very important aspect.

So first, I have to say that this framework addresses the planning aspect.

But that planning is not necessarily

the optimal or the optimal solution in the sense that what we are interested in is optimization or planning under a limited structure.

The structure is characterized by here, vertical plausible two layer neural networks.

So yeah, planning,

occurred by association between risk in the future and our decision in the past.

Here, we model that aspect using a delayed modulation of cyanotic plasticity mediated by some neuromodulator or neurotransmitters.

This is the model.

This is modeled as the product of the risk factor and the heavier product holding the cost function, neural network cost function.


SPEAKER_00:
All right, I'm going to ask a great question from the chat, and then we'll look at the figures a little closer.

So ML Don wrote, a question stuck in my mind for a long time.

Could you please put it to rest?

Do we need to have knowledge about all states, possible actions, and sensory inputs for active inference?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, you mean if you seek the exact solution, exact optimal solution, then maybe more information would help you to find that.

But under some model, general model, under some ideal assumption, then

or variables are not necessary to achieve the optimal solution.

I'm not sure if I correctly answered your point.


SPEAKER_00:
So, just to restate it,

Of course, knowing all the state's possible actions and sensory inputs, it's not a bad thing.

Worst case, there's some computational complexity trade-offs, but the problem becomes fully stateable.

But I think ML Don is asking about cases where you don't know all of the state spaces or potentially even the dimensionality or the semantics of...

hidden states active states sensory inputs and why not even add cognitive states so in not just partially observed but partially known state spaces how are these addressed in neural networks and how does active inference help us think about it


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

I think the question is about how can we separate those states, sensory, action, internal, external.


SPEAKER_00:
How can we separate, not just in principle have these states be separated,

but deal with the fact that some of these states we might have good knowledge on and some states, like the hidden states, we might not even know.

Like we don't know the dimensionality of the cause vector in the world.

I see.


SPEAKER_01:
For example, in terms of dimensionality,

There is a statistical technique to estimate dimensionality, for example, various

information criteria, like Akai-gei information criteria, base information criteria, or then try to infer or estimate plausible dimensionality about the environmental hidden states.

So there is an analogy with those information criteria and variational free energy minimization.

So with variational free energy minimization, we can

we can identify the plausible model structure, which in principle involves the dimensionality aspect.

But in terms of neural network, in this paper, we don't carefully consider about the dimensionality optimization because we first define the number of neurons.

and don't change during training.

But in principle, we can consider the change in the number of neurons which is associated with, for example, adult neurogenesis or development during the developmental stage.

That would be an important extension.


SPEAKER_00:
this this this this direction that's very interesting here's um a remark well one note is equation one summarizes a lot of what you've been describing

There's a parallelism or a concordance being drawn between the loss function of neural networks and the variational free energy of the parameterized model there.

So to come back to these processes that influence learning, which we could think of as the neural network becoming more fit from a loss function perspective, or

the variational Bayesian partially observable Markov decision process entity generative model becoming better at doing what it does.

So there's the firing rate on the neural network side.

the synaptic plasticity at a slower time scale which we discussed a little earlier and then now there's a third time scale with the birth and death of new cells and maybe even new layers and that kind of multi-scale temporal structuring is not intrinsic to the base graph

to represent multiple nested time scales in a base graph in the active inference literature, it's more common to make a hierarchically nested model.

And just say that the time handling on one level is happening more rapidly with respect to clock time than deeper nested slower models.

Whereas the neural formulation

allows us to deal with multiple ongoing timescales without appealing to hierarchical nesting which is a very important feature well yeah both both directions would be


SPEAKER_01:
possible without hierarchical modeling or with hierarchical modeling.

So even with hierarchical modeling, the optimization of

dimensionality should be possible or would be possible but so in other direction so we can consider that a population of neural models so one has a single layer another has a

two layers, three layers, four layers, and consider the probability or plausibility of network architecture.

associated with the performance or cost function minimization under a particular environment, which is, in principle, have the same computational architecture with the hierarchical Bayesian model.


SPEAKER_00:
Very interesting.

Yes.

Perhaps I over generalized or speculated because I thought about how one could have a 100 time step POMDP that also performs multi-scale behavior, potentially extremely wastefully, but at least it could in principle.

And similarly within a neuron, there could be another neural network.

or some other structure approximated by that.

So they almost both enable hierarchical and non-hierarchical modeling, as you described, but in very different ways that lead to very different implementations.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
i think this brings us to the topic of forward and reverse engineering so you talked a lot about reverse engineering yeah what is reverse engineering and what is forward engineering and what has been done in these areas of engineering


SPEAKER_01:
OK, I'm not an expert of reverse engineering in the broad sense.

But I believe that reverse here means your characterization of the blueprint of some device or machine

data observable information like activity or action behavior of some agent right so goal is identification of the blueprint

and the crucially here blueprint correspond to generative model because once we define generative model we can derive variation of energy algorithm running algorithm inference algorithm and any behavior of agent so

here reverse means that we first observe some activity of agent and its mechanism is still unknown for us but we can estimate its mechanism using that activity by identifying the most plausible

generative model which can minimize some cost function or risk function when we feed the data to

the model.

So, on the other hand, forward engineering would be a more mainstream way, first define model, blueprint, generate model, then derive everything, including functional, running inference algorithms, behavior action algorithm.


SPEAKER_00:
So by reverse engineering neural networks, we're observing some already parameterized neural network and then fitting a POMDP to it.

To what extent is it possible to take a given POMDP and create a neural network that performs that inference?


SPEAKER_01:
uh okay in this paper uh or in the following uh paper what we consider is a strategy that we first fit uh empirical data whether for neural response data to a basically plausible canonical neural network model which is a

which is similar to a conventional model fitting approach, where we have differential equation and data and fit data to the differential equation to explain the behavior with the minimal prediction.

So now,

a virtue of this framework we established is that we can transform we can naturally transform such a neural network architecture with the well-known partially observable market decision process architecture because for any a kind of canonical neural network there is a

cost function.

So we derive cost function from neural activity equation, which is opposite with the conventional way we first define cost function derived algorithm.

And then we use

the former equivalence between neural network cost function and variational free energy.

So now transform the neural network architecture to Bayesian model architecture.

And once we characterize variational free energy, there should be some generative model that

define that variational free energy functional.

So in particular, in this example, canonical neural network nicely correspond to a class of well-known partially observed Markov decision process.

So by using this procedure, we

uh identify the plausible home dp architecture which is a quest which correspond to observed activity data okay


SPEAKER_00:
well let's stay on this last point so after all those transformations first the measurements of neurons using that data to fit the neural network and then by virtue of the relationships unpacked in the paper transforming the neural network in the left side of figure one into

a particular form of the POMDP.

So first, what are the constraints on that form of the POMDP?

Is this a little corner of model space or what are the space of acceptable POMDPs?


SPEAKER_01:
That totally depends on what kind of neural network model you are considering.

So for example,

In this paper, we discuss about a particular class of POMDP in which each state takes either 0 or 1.

So it's very restricted compared to the general form of POMDP.

But we consider a factorization in the sense that although

Each is either 0 or 1, but we consider a vector of observation, a vector of hidden state, where each element corresponds to one single one-hot vector.

But as an entire state, it can represent a high-dimensional discrete state space.

And this architecture nicely corresponds to neural network architecture because usually each neuron takes

either 0 over 1 or some continuous variable between 0 and 1.

So we use this association to characterize a particular POMDP which corresponds to neural networks.

And this follows a particular mean field approximation or approximation in generative model because we associate posterior belief in this particular POMDP with the neural activity.

which means that posterior of action also have a factorization architecture, in the sense that we don't, we don't fully consider about the second order statistics between neuron 1's activity and neuron 2's activity, which is outside of this formalism.

So each

Each neuron's activity corresponds to a posterior expectation about a particular element of the state.

And we don't consider the joint posterior probability of all states.

So although this is a limitation, we see this as a Bayesian inference.

But otherwise, we can consider any recurrent network architecture which corresponds to a state of transition matrix.

And it would be possible to extend this architecture to hierarchical structure in the sense that it is straightforward to consider a tree structure or any kind of hierarchical structure by assuming that some neuron connect to other neuron but not connect to

other neuron.

So this is same as considering hierarchal structure in general.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, that's very interesting.

It's commonly remarked in

the base graphs that they represent the connections amongst random variables.

And there's a relationship between their computability and their sparsity.

The sparsity structure as in which variables do or do not influence each other

makes the problem tractable through factorization and just kind of conceptually.

Like if every one of a thousand variables or an unknown number of large variables, if it was all by all, the number of parameters to fit on that connectivity matrix would be very high.

So statistical power would be very low for any given edge.

Whereas the more and more constrained you make the connectivity of the variables,

the more statistical power you have to resolve or kind of spend on fitting those edges, like in a structural equation.

But you might be losing sight of the unknown unknowns by constraining yourself to a very limited or fallacious topology of the variables.

So there's this kind of structure learning, statistical inference question in the Bayes graphs.

then on the neural side from the biological much of neuroscience is about understanding how the firing rate connectivity patterns and other factors how the structure of those neural systems and their function like form and function enable

adequate inference and inference on action.

So it's like in both of those areas, or really like in neural network, artificial and neural networks, and in variational bays, the discussion is about how the structure and the fine tuning

work together to generate function and about some of the statistical or um biological challenges of balancing different needs while also constraining the cost in terms of materials and biometabolism so it's a very rich intersection that is being explored here

if these models can really be moving back and forth.


SPEAKER_01:
In the sense that back and forth?


SPEAKER_00:
Moving back and forth like there's some imprints of the model that is implementation independent or like some interlingua or some semantics

Or compatibility?

I don't really know.

I mean, that's something we can explore is like, what is it that is such that one could forward engineer and then reverse engineer and have like kind of an expectation maximization between these two areas?

So what is it that's being sought?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, that's an important point.

For example, a virtue of this relationship is that we can use the knowledge of Bayesian inference to explain neuroactivity and neurodynamics.

which is crucial because people often say that characterizing neural dynamics is not straightforward.

We may obtain some solution of neural net dynamics, but the meaning of that dynamics in terms of functional aspect is very unclear.

We don't know the meaning of connectivity

strength matrices and what is the meaning of the threshold factor so on so on those are derived from the you know the modeling physiological phenomena but it is not necessary to

have a clear linkage to a functional explanation of the brain.

But once we translate these dynamics into Bayesian inference,

then we can explain every functional aspect of the neural net dynamics architecture in terms of where established Bayesian inference under a particular class of Bayesian modeling, in this case, POMDP model.

So now it turns out that synaptic strengths correspond to A matrix, B matrix, which are very established

clear meaning.

So yeah, this is useful to explain neural synaptic property in terms of where we establish statistics.

Also, for the people in the active inference side,

it would be helpful to understand the neuronal substrates

about a particular active inference model.

So I think it's related to forward modeling.

But finally, to discuss about the vertical substrate of that forward model, we need to address the neural network

architecture, the substrate property.

So in that

case, we can transform a particular POMDP Bayesian modeling to a neural network architecture using this relationship and then get a prediction about the substrate.

So if we have this Bayesian model, this particular quantity in this model should be

would be possible using.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, sorry.

Oh, it's all good.

Can you just repeat the last, like, 20 seconds?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So in the last part I mentioned about the four, so first we define the Bayesian model and then can predict what is the neuronal substrate that corresponds to

that particular Bayesian model.

So this would be useful to identify the biological quantities that correspond to a quantity in Bayesian influence.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Well,

there's a lot there it makes me think about the differences of implementation and heuristics in the computational setting which is often in the extreme disembodied and the biological setting which is in the extreme entirely embodied and for a given generative model

the kinds of computational heuristics that can be applied include a whole host of different strategies ranging from sampling to tree exploration and branching to parallel paralyzing the data architecture and all these other kinds of disparate strategies and software packages and implementations

But on the biological side, what is needed is something that's very simple, but also very inscrutable, which is a given pattern of interactions must embody that calculation.

So that might mean that it can add three digit numbers, but it can't add two digit numbers under some constraints.

but what isn't accessible to that kind of morphological biological or like form and functional computing what's not accessible are the tree branching the database decentralization like they're a different set of heuristics

right but they're both very useful when we're thinking about making sentient artifacts or benefiting simply from the explainability across both sides of this figure yeah


SPEAKER_01:
So you now address an important point.

So honestly, it is very non-trivial whether there is a corresponding biological architecture for any given Bayesian architecture.

I believe it is impossible to design biological architecture to correspond to arbitrary Bayesian architecture.

Only a limited aspect of Bayesian model can be implemented in a biological plausible manner.

And that point is crucial as a characterization of biological network, biological brain.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

Well, just to kind of touch again on this forward and reverse engineering,

for a given pomdp if we're willing to compose it within a certain class which might be quite general still but some class of pomdp as written on the paper

we may be able to have a neural network architecture that would be very amenable to deep learning, low energy computing, pre-training, various features.

And then on the other side, for a given artificial neural network that we come across in the wild,

or a model of neural dynamics that we fit using a neural network model, so something in a neuroscience laboratory, that model can have interpretability corresponding to the variables of a given POMDP.

And just to kind of give one more point on how that's going deeper than, for example, statistical parametric mapping, SPM.

So let's just assume that the neural network we're dealing with is fit from brain data from some lucky ant.

Right now, what would be possible, or prior to this line of work or without this line of work, one could...

fit a neural dynamics model and then do all kinds of analyses like power analyses on the different frequency spectra and say, look at the average firing rate or the correlation coefficients of firing rate.

So fit the firing rates and the synaptic plasticities and store all that data.

And then we could just pick a POMDP that we've seen in the literature

without any reference to the neural network and optimize the POMDP.

And then we could say, well, it turns out that when the POMDP O is high, there's increased theta power in this firing pattern.

So it's like comparing the descriptive statistics from the neural model to the descriptive summary statistics of the POMDP decision-making model.

However, with this formal connection, there is actually an interpretability to the unobserved neural states, which are what are being inferred from the fMRI measurement, from the EEG measurements and so on.

Those underlying variables have a specific interpretability in relationship to the structure of the POMDP.


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

So yeah, that's also a very interesting, important aspect.

So as you said, what you said is, I think, conventional, more conventional strategy.

And it is also

formally related to model comparison aspect so we usually think various major modeling and identify or select what is the

you know best model to explain the given data and this reverse engineering idea involves such a model comparison aspect in the sense that we we try to find the model with the best best explainability which should be

have the identical functional, right?

So we directly addresses the exact same cost function architecture using the transformation, natural transformation.

So it should be up to explain the neural data in the Bayesian sense.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah one can imagine how that would transform the way that current neuroimaging studies and technologies describe

what it is about the measurement that provides information about the cognitive model so to give another related example let's just say a person was wearing a EEG headset and a previous study had shown that increased Alpha band activity was associated with this behavior

That's comparing a descriptive statistic of the observations of the sensor and correlating the summarized observable to some other variable, like anxiety or performance on a behavior.

In contrast, an unobserved variable in this setting

the actual underlying neural state is being correlated to some semantic generative model component.

So it's no longer necessarily that any single frequency band would be associated more or less with a given outcome.

but it's actually some hidden state variability which gains the interpretability across this transformation which is a subtle point but it speaks to how broadly the equivalents would reinterpret empirical neuroimaging results

as well as a variety of artificial neural network experiments and diagnostics where people do lesion studies and double knockouts on artificial neural networks so anywhere where somebody with awareness sees that a neural network artificial or biological

is having summary features described and correlated to something that's more semantic in a quest for meaning may now have a different approach that involves formalizing the model explicitly in terms of unobserved hidden states with a cost function

akin to a variational free energy minimizing risk bounding surprise on the unobservables so even though the unobservables were modeled in a sense in the other conventional strategy like neural activity is a variable in fmri experiments it's underlying the bold signal

Yet this formalism concordance is a more coherent and powerful connection.


SPEAKER_01:
I believe so.

So you now address this very

important point.

First, to address that, we need to

clarify about the what is a program considered here.

So this is a problem so called meta Bayesian problem in the sense that researchers try to infer or estimate neural activity or brain activity, which inferred the external world dynamics, right?

So neuron or

brain-inferred environment, and we research inferred brain activity.

So there are two-step Bayesian inference processes.

So this sort of meta-Bayesian problem is quite tricky, intractable, because sometimes

So probability, so sometimes random variable becomes a posterior belief about other aspect.

So I think there is some established approach about meta Bayesian, but this paper provides some alternative in the sense that we separate two problem by saying that

here, what we infer is simply a neural network model or neural network dynamics, which is shown in the left-hand side of this figure.

So we feed the data to conventional neural network model, which is a simple differential equation.

But thanks to this

formal equivalence between neural network dynamics and the POMDP behavior, then we can transform the resulting neural network architecture or dynamics into the Bayesian inference in some sense post hoc manner.

So we nicely avoid directly addressing the meta Bayesian problem, but obtain the same kind of solution.

In that sense, yes, combining with brain activity recording like EEG or imaging, we can estimate a plausible neural network model in the left-hand side and we can transform that to a POMDP in the right-hand side.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

Awesome.

I'm going to show an image and ask a question from Dave in the chat.

So Dave made this image.

It's the right side of figure one that we've just been looking at with the variational Bayesian formation.

And he wrote, the arc shown as impinging on the S self-arc

Is this intentional?

If so, it could represent tuning or modulation of the feedback of S into itself.

So do you have a thought on this?


SPEAKER_01:
It's intentional, yes.

I think it's related to the usual formulation of POMDP architecture and active inference context, in the sense that

you know our decision or policy in the usual setting modify the state transition matrix B matrix right so here delta is an alternative of policy

of agent.

So basically, the director indicates a state transition matrix under a particular decision which agent made.

In that sense, what the agent changes is a state transition matrix, not the state itself directly.

That's why we use this illustration.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome very subtle but important point which is when we look at the classical pomdp formulation so here we'll look at a version shown in figure two i'll just bring just figure two in um could you describe what you just did about the role of the b matrix in


SPEAKER_01:
influencing how hidden states change and how that is where our policies have impact and also please how do the top and the bottom of figure two differ okay so in the in the usual formulation uh under uh active influence uh with the pom db structure so we first consider uh

uh the the three prior free for us and the

depending on the prior preference, we compute the expected energy and its minimization provides the policy and the policy modulates the state transition.

So now in the upper layer, we instead use the

filter which is the action of the agent so here action or decision was made for each time step

so that unlike the computational formulation, we have a sequence of delta.

And for each time step, delta modulates the state transition matrix B. So B is the matrix that transforms a hidden state in the previous step to the S in the current time step.

Its moderation indicates that under a specific decision rule, for example, if this S indicates our position in the virtual environment, with the GO decision, our position moves forward.

Or if we choose a no-go decision, then it's unchanged.

So such a modulation of state transition was made by choosing delta.

And the lower part corresponds to Bayesian inference made by a Bayesian agent.

So basically, there is a symmetry between upper part and the lower part because we assume that this Bayesian agent has a plausible generative model which nicely corresponds to a given environment defined in the above part, upper part in this figure.

But one interesting thing, asymmetry, is that to model this particular canonical neural network, we don't

consider an arrow or a link from delta posterior to s posterior which is in the environment delta modulate s in the next step.

through beam matrix modulation.

In this particular Bayesian engine, which formally correspond to canonical neural network,

we don't consider that.

It is correspond to an absence of the projection from output layer to the middle layer.

OK.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's.

This is from the

2020 paper but it shows the neural network architecture the two-layer architecture so could you um restate the top and the bottom of figure two in the 22 paper and connect it to why it's important that you're studying two-layer neural network models

uh i miss you oh yeah can you just connect um the uh asymmetry between the top and the bottom on figure two with the two-layer neural network architecture you said that the asymmetry there's no direct link between


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is another story.

So in the previous paper, there is only output rate or the perceptual layer, because we basically consider a single-layer feedforth network.

My apologies for some confusion about the network architecture in the 2020 paper.

So now, upper part of this network architecture correspond to environmental generative process.

And only a lower part correspond to single layer, single feed forward neural network architecture.

So now,

This part is identical to a map from O to S posterior in the 2022 papers.


SPEAKER_00:
Ah.

Okay.

So, on the top of Figure 2,

is the actual generative process.

It's the true structure of causation in the environment, which is to say that actions, delta, actually influence how states change through time via B delta.

The generative process through the A matrix emits observations, sequences of observations.

and here on the bottom with a mirrored structure is the generative model of the entity so what's the relevance of the arrows and the more 40 factor graph structure on the bottom the arrow uh indicates the the


SPEAKER_01:
the influence.

So it's a flow of the information in the sense that to calculate S in the step 2, we use the information of step 2's observation and step 1's

posterior expectation of our hidden state.

So those two determine the S2's expectation.

Usually in the phonograph, we consider a retrospective

So in the sense that S3 also affect the S2 inference.

But this correspond to a Bayesian smoother in the sense that we update every time step simultaneously to better inference.

However, what we consider here is more

filtering approach in the sense that for each step we compute the latest hidden state and then we don't change any other states in the past.

So that's why we don't consider the arrow from future to the past.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Yeah, just to highlight that.

In the Bayesian smoothing approach, it's kind of like fitting a spline because it takes the whole time series and it fits the smoothest possible line or the line whose smoothness is on the AIC-BIC frontier.

But here on the bottom, with the almost pseudocode implementation provided by the 40-factor graph, which was demonstrated to be equivalent with the Bayesian graph in the 2017 work with Fristin, Parr, and de Vries.

This architecture is reflecting a filtering scheme like a Kalman filter or just generalized Bayesian filtering through time where

estimates are being carried forward and changed time point to time point such that the decision rules or the updates perhaps more accurately are defined between time points and the total time series does not have to be loaded into memory or remembered at once and then the Bayesian filtering approach

has the asymmetry with a different consideration of action.

So why again is it that action is considered differently in the Bayesian filtering approach on the bottom of the generative model than the consideration of action in the generative process?


SPEAKER_01:
That corresponds to

lack of connection from y to x in the figure one or probably a figure four is helpful to the that relationship you also uh

Yeah, this is an example network architecture comprising input layer, middle layer, output layer.

What we consider is the information flow from sensory to middle layer, and middle layer have self-connection, recurrent connection, and middle layer project to output layer.

So there is no connection from all output layer to middle layer.

So that's why we don't consider the link from delta in the bottom layer of the figure to 2s posterior.

So this is different from true

generative process in the environment.

This is a kind of simplification because our purpose is identifying the plausible Bayesian model which corresponds to this type of Tureya neural network, canonical network.

So in other words, this canonical neural network uses an approximation about that point or uses a limited form of POMDP scheme.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

So could you describe W, V, K, and gamma?

Just what is the biological or functional interpretation of those variables?

What brain regions or what processes or pathologies do they map to?


SPEAKER_01:
OK, so basically W, V, K are synaptic stresses in the form of matrices.

And their difference, so they represent

dynamic connection in the different layer or different architecture, in the sense that W means forward connectivity from sensory layer to middle layer, K corresponds to recurrent network, recurrent connectivity, and V corresponds to projection from middle layer to output layer.

So in this paper, we don't discuss the relation to brain anatomy in detail.

But one can consider an analogy, for example, say x correspond to cerebral cortex activity and y

why, for example, correspond to cerebrum in the sense that it determines the action.

So it is considered that in the cerebrum there is a signal that represents a choice decision, for example, goal decision or no goal decision.

made in Cerebrum.

It's analogous to this particular architecture.

On the other hand, in the Cerebrum, sorry, in the Cerebral Cortex, we compute the sensory information to generate some inference, prediction, and perhaps planning, so on.

which is computed by this recurrent network in this particular modeling.

Although we don't separate brain region in detail, this class of recurrent network is sufficient to characterize any type of architectures.

in the sense that we can design any higher curve or mutually connected architecture using a generic class of recurrent network by changing weight matrices.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

So the middle layer we can think of as like the cognitive stuff.

It's the internal states when we talk about perception, cognition, action in the act-inf scheme or even in the sandwich model of cognition, perception, cognition, action.

so w is describing how those sensory inputs either in one step or composably in multiple steps become processed to these x representations of hidden external causes inferred external states and so these are the states that have that sigma relationship

a generalized synchrony with external states the sigma and the generalized synchrony are not discussed in in your paper but um it connects to other work and the recurrent connections are facilitating attention or waiting of the stimuli

This is the recurrent learning loop and the relationship of the A between observations and hidden state estimates.

And then a different kind of modulation comes into play between the hidden state estimate of the internal state and the action selection.

So what is gamma?

Corresponding to and why is the gamma modulation between layers two and three differing functionally from the K synaptic modulation of one and two?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so K matrix basically formally correspond to B matrix in the Bayesian formulation.

So it's the information about the prediction, right?

Our knowledge or our expectation about the next state based on the previous state.

On the other hand, the role of gamma is quite different from such a computation.

Gamma basically means risk factor, risk function, which is... In principle, we can use arbitrary risk function.

So this is a part of generative model we designed.

And the role of risk function in generative model formulation is an alternation of form of generative model depending on the value of gamma, which enables

post-addictive or retrospective modulation of evaluation and past decisions given an outcome in the future.

In terms of neural network, of course,

it corresponds to some neuromodulation.

For example, dopaminergic moderation is famous in the literature, which modulates the activity and plasticity of various brain regions.

But we particularly focus on dopaminergic or any kind of neuromodulation of cyanotic plasticity in

the output layer which may correspond to cerebrum.

In the cerebrum, neuroactivity or plasticity modulated by dopaminergic input is used as the optimization option

rule, decision rule, or sometimes attention and various purpose.


SPEAKER_00:
awesome very interesting because in some previous papers and models that we've looked at attention is dealt with as policy selection on mental states so internal action selection is it's an action-like variable describing attention and awareness and even metacognition and so that connects

the role of dopamine in motor decision making seen in many dyskinesias, but also with the role of dopamine in seemingly

non-motor based decision making like gambling or investing where it doesn't seem to immediately translate to a given motor sequence yet it has analogous computational characteristics and the comorbidities and the side effects of different drugs that affect the dopamine neurophysiology are known to have carryover

in terms of like the rigidity or excessivity of motor and decision-making aspects so it's like interesting that dopamine has long been understood to have that parallel role in attention as cognitive action and motor action and that was established empirically through modifications of dopamine signaling

and also had been modeled analogously with computational neuroscience and this is providing again a slightly different interpretation of that very well studied dopaminergic modulation of attention and policy um


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

And in addition to that, I believe another important aspect is a modulation of synaptic plasticity by dopamine.

Well, I can show you.


SPEAKER_00:
Do you want to show something?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Can you see this paper?

I sent you a link in the chat.

Or if you can't, I'll send you a PDF.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, let me see.

I'll get it up now.

right the paper is um a critical time window for dopamine actions on the structural plasticity of dendritic spines from 2014. so what is interesting about this paper


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it basically explains the modulation of plasticity by dopamine, which is common.

But the crucial point of this paper is that it proves that dopaminergic input can modulate

Hebbian plasticity even after Hebbian plasticity is established.

So this paper showed that they add dopaminergic input, for example, two seconds after or several seconds after the Hebbian plasticity is established.

But such a post hoc modulation, post hoc

introduction of dopaminergic input is sufficient to change the past plasticity, which may be associated with the post hoc re-evaluation of our past decisions.

So by decision making, we of course changing the plasticity, changing the weight matrix through plasticity,

But to evaluate the goodness or badness of our decision, we need to observe the future outcome, which is propagated by, for example, dopamine.

And this paper nicely shows empirically that dopamine actually can change the past

this Jones evaluation, maybe after such a psychic level, very, very local level equals called peak level.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_00:
So there's a short term window

critical time window that they're describing but there's some window yeah some window yeah by which dopamine potentially unrelated to the initial heavy and plasticity event right where secondary dopamine signaling or not secondary just after the initial fact

potentially have a different valence or the same valence can synergize or cancel the plasticity formed in the moment.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

And this is not limited to dopamine, but other neuromodulator can also do this.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, on one hand, how does this change our understanding of animal neurophysiology?

And then I guess on the other hand, how does this influence how we would design sentient artifacts?


SPEAKER_01:
For both animals and the sentient,

agent artificial agent uh and one important message i believe is that so this tells us um possible simple architecture to make planning you know this is association between past decision and future reward or any risk factors which is otherwise computed by

computing forward prediction by iterating some computation.

I believe this is a usual way to predict the future event and then select the action.

But using this physical property, which is observed in an actual experiment,

we can design, we can imagine other simpler architecture to make a planning.

So for both animal and synthetic Bayesian agent, it provides an alternative explanation about the


SPEAKER_00:
association between our past decision and the future based on the optimization of our decision to maximize the reward or minimize risk well one interesting note is we spoke earlier about the difference between the bayesian smoothing all at once approach and the bayesian filtering step-by-step approach now

If one had infinite knowledge and computational resources, the Bayesian smoothing approach is the way to go.

Like, you don't want the decision rule for investment.

You want to look at the whole time series, past, present, and future, and know the best moments to have made the trades.

I mean, there's no comparison.

You're going to do better with the Bayesian smoothing.

However, it's just implausible computationally and because it requires total memory of the past and knowledge of the future.

So that's what motivates the development of Bayesian filtering approaches, which are tractable and calculable through time.

Yet, with this time-delayed modulation,

part of the Bayesian smoothing strength comes back into play.

It doesn't enable true anticipation of future states, but that's what the expected free energy does.

However, the delayed neuromodulation allows for reconsideration of a window of past states

And so in that way, it corresponds to like a slightly deeper filter.

Not just a filter of a time step of one, but a filter of like a rolling window of five or with some decay.

And you don't want that window to be too big because if the window were 10 minutes...

then too many contrasting stimuli would get piled together.

The dopamine level would just converge to a mean field average.

But there's some time decay or time constant on the post hoc modulation where that neuromodulatory signal is actually a parameter of interest.

and that's not an infinitely long or infinitely short window but it's some niche dependent amount of time and that's a very interpretable and first principles interpretation of the computational role of neuromodulators in a way that is also consistent with all these other concordances we've been exploring so

it's quite an interesting connection back.

I guess in our final minutes of this discussion, what are you, well, maybe go to the beginning at the end.

which I meant to ask earlier, but it's a good way that we can sort of close today and look forward, which is how did you come to this line of research, specifically studying neural networks in this way with Carl Friston and your colleagues?


SPEAKER_01:
So, yes.

So, well...

So my interest was the characterization of biological network.

So my first motivation is to make a biologically plausible artificial intelligence, but to achieve that we need to know about biological brain or biological neural network.

And then, in these several years, I collaborated with the doctor, Professor Carl Christen, to study about his theory of re-energy principle activity in forests.

And then my question during that period was, is the free energy principle everything about the biologically plausible neural network?

Or is there any other aspect that can characterize

uh the vertical neural network so it is non-trivial uh it was non-trivial so that's why i i tried to so i tried to start from uh characterizing the neural network first so our strategy is not

not considering the way of implementing any Bayesian algorithm as the brain architecture.

But my interest is rather characterization of a given vertical network in terms of

something, some other things.

One possible way is, of course, Bayesian inference, free-energy principle-active inference.

So that's why I first start from characterizing biological network.

But just defining neural network architecture is insufficient.

It is too

it is not tractable.

It is far beyond the computational tractability as the mathematical analysis.

And we need some assumption or some trick to increase the tractability.

And one day, I came up with an idea that

So in which we consider that both neuroactivity and plasticity follow the same cost function gradient.

This is very much an analogy with a physical system like Lagrangian formulation or Hamiltonian formulation.

So usually we

consider some energy landscape and design plausible trajectory as the solution of some principle of minimum action or least action.

So we

Imagine that, what if we apply such idea to neural network, conventional neural, canonical neural network or biological neural network to characterize their dynamics in the first principle.

That's the first motivation, first step to come up with this framework.

And finally, we noticed that it is not easy to connect the Newtonian dynamics with this type of neural activity study because neural activity creation is not necessary to be a second-order differential equation.

rather it is a first order and considering many things then we we finally used a cost function proposed in the papers which is not necessary have a formal

identity with the so-called Lagrangian in the Newtonian physics, but it is rather plausible as the rule or underlying mechanism of such type of network.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Well, it has been quite an interesting dot one.

I really appreciate everything you've shared today.

Is there anything else you want to add at this point?

Otherwise, we'll talk again.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

I already speak.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Talk to you later.

Bye.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thank you very much for a nice discussion.

## hY_CajLpt9Q

SPEAKER_04:
Hello and welcome everyone.

This is Active Livestream number 51.2.

It's November 9th, 2022.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following video etiquette for livestreams.

Head over to activeinference.org to learn more about participating in different institute projects.

All right, well, we're in

actin stream number 51.2 we're in our third discussion on the paper canonical neural networks perform active inference from 2022. we had a dot zero video with some background and context and overview and then last week in 51.1 we had a great discussion went over many interesting details of the paper

and related topics so today we're going to jump in cover some empirical details some implications connect some more dots maybe look at some code and thanks again takuya for joining these discussions um

i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california and thought a lot over the last week about what this kind of neural network pomdp synthesis or translation really means

and just want to learn more about what fundamentals or foundational aspects of these different kinds of models enable that synthesis or translation and then again what that means for areas where one or the other kind of model is already in use so thanks again for joining and i'll pass it to you

If you want to say hi or give any other a second introduction.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, yeah.

I'm Takuya Isomura in RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Japan.

So I look forward to discuss another different aspect of this work.


SPEAKER_04:
So yeah.

Well, let's just remind ourselves of the fundamental parallel being made in the paper, and then we'll get to these two questions about kind of the two directions that things can go.

One representation is in equation one.

with a loss function of a neural network and the free energy on a POMDP.

And that's also seen visually in figure one with a neural network being drawn a concordance against the variational base of the action perception loop.

So maybe just let's begin by restating what is this parallel

that is in equation one and figure one.

And how was it reached in this paper?


SPEAKER_00:
So,

Basically, the idea here is that we would like to characterize the dynamics and plasticity of canonical neural network in terms of Bayesian inference because arbitrary dynamics of neural network is intractable in the sense that we don't know

what is the function underlying such a dynamics and what is the consequence of the self-organization or plasticity.

So once we translate the dynamics in terms of Bayesian inference, we can assign

quantities in Bayesian inference for any biological quantities, which enables us to lend the explainability to the neural network dynamics and architecture.

So that's a basic idea.

And what we have done in this paper is that we

consider a biologically plausible cost function for this particular canonical neural network and show the equivalence between that cost function and the variation of free energy under a particular partially observable normal composition process model.


SPEAKER_03:
So, yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

So let's look at the parallel between the cost function for neural networks and the variational free energy.

So one representation of that was in figure three.

So maybe could you just describe what is the structure of the variational free energy expression and what is the structure of the loss function?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, so there is a clear parallel between the functional structure or those component in variational free energy and the component in neural network cost function.

So let's say the first time in F correspond to the, yeah, it's correspond to the

the expectation about hidden state.

S is hidden state posterior.

So that part basically indicates the free energy with respect to the hidden state.

Yeah.

And the second part

correspond to the free energy but the decision posterior so here delta indicates the posterior belief about agent decision or action and now

in terms of the correspondence between the free energy and neural network function here the first time in the neural network cost function correspond to middle layer neural activity which has the recurrent connection and receive sensory input from sensory layer and then project the

the output to the output layer.

And the second term corresponds to the output layer, which receives signals from the middle layer and sends the feedback response to the environment.


SPEAKER_04:
So both of these expressions have the first term being more like a cognitive, perceptual, sensory learning term.

And the second term is more like a control theoretic action selection.

And how did you see this analogy or concordance?

Because it looks like a zipper, like everything is totally lined up.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, so this figure, this graph itself showed a clear correspondence because so now

we are considering a particular form of POMDP in which each element of hidden state takes either 0 or 1.

But there are many states, so it is expressed in the form of, you know,

factorization.

So now we consider that in terms of the S's posterior, bold S, upper part of bold S correspond to the expectation about each element of S taking one.

and the lower part of the bold S correspond to the expectation about S taking zero.

So it is a block vector about the expectation, posterior expectation.

And this S nicely

correspond to the block vector shown in the bottom of this figure.

It is a vector of x and bar x. And here, bar x indicates 1 minus x in the element-wise sense.

which exactly corresponds to the block vector of S expectation.

This correspondence also observed in the second

term here log s correspond to log x and also log a correspond to the block matrix of w log w here

W hat indicates the sigmoidal function of W, and its bar means 1 minus sigmoidal function of W. So actually, because we now consider binary hidden state and binary observation, it's likelihood mapping

So likelihood mapping from hidden state to observation is expressed as a block matrix, which exactly corresponds to the block matrix shown in the bottom of this figure.

So like this, for every term, we have the exact correspondence between the upper expression and the lower expression.

So that's why we can say that this is a natural mapping from neural network formation to variational region formation.

So it speaks as a sort of identity between those two different expressions.

So although one may be able to consider another mapping from neural network to Bayesian inference, this is a sort of the simplest mapping.


SPEAKER_04:
So how would it look different if it were three states categorical distribution or a continuous distribution?

What aspects would change?


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you for asking that.

So that's, in some sense, outside of this paper, because only when we consider a binary state, binary hidden state, this analogy is established nicely.

Otherwise,

we need to consider some extension.

So because consider that each neuron encode the probability or expectation of some value taking 1.

Then the probability or expectation

of taking 0 can be simply computed by computing 1 minus neural activity.

So actually, neural activity, which is a single-dimensional variable, is sufficient to express the expectation.

But once we consider the three-state hidden state program,

So this doesn't work, so we need to consider at least two variables, but its relation to neural network expression is not very clear in general.


SPEAKER_04:
that's very interesting why it would be so strong of a concordance in a binary case but immediately unclear for other distributions yeah


SPEAKER_00:
Generally, for POMDP expression, we consider the one-hot expression, one-hot vector expression, which means that we normalize the value in the sense that the summation or variable to be one.

Maybe there is some neural substrates that achieve that normalization, but for a classic type of neural network, like canonical neural network considered in this paper,

What is that neuronal substrate is not really clear.

That's why we selected the binary case, because it's simple and has a clear analogy.


SPEAKER_04:
So what does it mean for a artificial or for a biological neuron to have activity dynamics or plasticity context that justifies it being described as playing like a belief role in a Bayesian setting?

Higher firing means more belief, higher firing means lower belief.

What does it really mean to have a connection between activity dynamics and belief states?


SPEAKER_00:
I see.

So if you assign a particular mapping, then it's meaning.

is also determined.

In this case, we assign that neural activity correspond to the posterior expectation about an element of hidden state taking one.

So once we define this mapping, then higher neural activity indicate the higher probability of taking one.


SPEAKER_04:
So neural activity is on the x-axis, and the y-axis of the sigmoid function is the probability of taking one.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, neural activity encodes the expectation.

So neural activity is the sigmoidal function of something itself.

So this is because once we see a fixed point of neural activity equation, which is derived from this cos function, it has a form of sigmoidal function.

So x equals sigmoidal function of blah, blah, blah.

So this form is exactly correspond to a softmax

operation softmax function of something which is seen in the solution of posterior expectation that is so that's what the neural activity encodes and what is the Bayesian interpretation or the update rules on the plasticity

OK, that's another important point.

So in terms of posterior parameters, so in the case of Bayesian inference, we consider the update about the Dirichlet parameter of A matrix and B matrix, which is usually expressed by the small case variable.

And its meaning is that if we compute the partial derivative of f with respect to small a, then its fixed point solution looks like

Outer product of SNO, which is also known as Hebbian product, because it has analogy to update rule depending on the pre-synaptic neuron activity and post-synaptic neuron activity.

And according to this formal equivalence, we revisit, we can see again such an analogy in a formal sense here.

if we compute the partial derivative of L neural network cost function with respect to W, then we get a

then we can formally derive the Hebbian plasticity which depends on the activity of pre- and post-synaptic neural activity.


SPEAKER_04:
okay so hebion plasticity often described as neurons that fire together wired together here you're discussing it in terms of a matrix operation on the pomdp side between observables and hidden states so there's a hebion plasticity happening between the perceptual layer

and the cognitive layer.

Right.

So the first half of the neural network is trained according to Hebbian plasticity rules that optimize the A in terms of the perceptual and learning-like relationship between hidden states and observables.

then the second half of the neural network has a slightly different structure it is optimizing based upon retroactive reanalysis of consequences of action according to the fictive causality construction


SPEAKER_00:
So actually, in this figure B, upper layer correspond to environment, and the lower part correspond to agent.

So this structure correspond to figure A's.

This correspond to a simpler version of POMDP.

So for full version of POMDP,

Its corresponding neural network is showing figure four of this paper.

This is the neural network architecture.

All right.

So as you said, there is a network connection from sensory layer to cognitive layer, which is expressed by W here, and recurrent connection, which correspond to state transition matrix,

is expressed by K matrix which is recurrent synaptic connectivity and as you say the action generation through retrospective reward or risk evaluation is done by output layer through the

synaptic connectivity expressed as V in this figure.


SPEAKER_04:
So V is the synaptic connectivity between cognitive states in the middle layer and the action selection states in Y. And so in that way, V is exactly analogous to W. But why and how does gamma come into play only in this second layer?

I mean, why not have gamma one in the first layer, gamma two in the second layer?


SPEAKER_00:
Generally speaking, it is possible to modulate plasticity in the first layer using another modulator, gamma.

But for simplicity, we focus only on neural modulation in the output layer.

Analogy is that, for example, as you said, the first layer computes more perceptual things, so perception of an external world, and instead, on the other hand, the second layer, which is

mapping from cognitive layer to action layer

perform the optimization of its own action.

For example, in the story atom, in the brain, action selection is optimized by modulation of dopaminergic input.

Usually, that circuit receives signals from a cortical neural circuit and sends signals to another neural nucleus in

meet a brain.

But a point here is that neuron in striatum encode some decision, for example, goal or no goal.

So such a decision is encoded.

So now we consider analogy between POMDP expression in the Bayesian formation and the neural circuit in the brain that optimize action through some sort of modulation by another factor here that factor correspond to gamma

And the role of gamma, gamma has a variety of functions.

But in this paper, we focus only on the modulation of plasticity.

So here, the Hebbian plasticity is not determined by only a preposterous relationship, but determined by

It's a three-factor relationship in the sense that the plasticity is updated by the product of gamma and pre- and post-synaptic activity.

So there are three times in one plasticity group.

This is why this gamma can modulate plasticity.


SPEAKER_04:
So how would a glial factor look different computationally?

And where in the brain have people identified glial or other factors as relevant for learning?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's interesting point.

I'm not fully sure about the equation of the glial modulation of neural activity or

plasticity, there are many discussion and I don't, I'm sorry, I don't know the exact form, but one possible implementation is similar to this type of neuromodulation.

So it would be possible to

model some glial modulation, contribution of glial factor to plasticity in the form of three-factor learning rule, which is mathematically speaking the same as this type of neuromodulation.


SPEAKER_04:
here in table two we have another set of correspondences it's like a sideways figure three right but a little bit more like a dictionary anything to add or any variables that we haven't really mentioned

What about the firing thresholds?

Because these are common parameters in a neural model.

However, we don't really hear about the interpretation of these constructs within the variational Bayes POMDP.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, there is an interesting story.

Yeah, that's a very interesting point.

So when we first tried to make made an analogy between neural network on the home DP program, one program is

the law of threshold factor, because as you said, it is not observed in POMDP structure.

But there is another factor in POMDP, which is prior expectation about hidden state, which is usually expressed by D matrix.

And we

But what we consider is the relationship between the matrix and the firing threshold.

Finally, what we found is that spiring threshold is not equal to D matrix itself, but it is a summation of D matrix and some function of synaptic strength, which is equal to A matrix, B matrix in the POMDP formation.

In other words, what we found is that H, which is the firing threshold in neural network architecture, is actually an adaptive threshold, which is not

fixed value but h is a function of w synaptic strength and h changes depending on

For example, if W is too large, then neural activity can be unstable.

So we have to reduce the activity to make neural activity more stable.

So we can see an analogy of homeostatic mechanism here.

So like this, if we design H as the function of W and the function of some another factor, which is all perturbation term in this,

table, then we could make a formal analogy between this H and some variable in POMDP formulation, which is shown in the right-hand side of this table.

table, although its value is not simple because it has three terms, three different terms.

So all of them contribute to make H or M

But anyway, once we establish a mapping between H and this value, then everything works.

So the cost function in different settings have a homer correspondence.


SPEAKER_04:
What are the H and the M firing thresholds?


SPEAKER_00:
So H corresponds to middle-layer RM threshold, and M indicates output-layer threshold, which are different variables.

And interestingly, H corresponds to prior expectation but hidden state, because it corresponds to cognitive layer, and M corresponds to


SPEAKER_04:
prior belief about its own action because it is a it is a bias in the action layer yeah it's very interesting that the perceptual firing threshold h only includes prior beliefs on hidden states

beliefs about how observations map to hidden states A and beliefs about how hidden states change through time B. So that's like pure passive inference.

And then the firing thresholds for M correspond to only beliefs about preferences and beliefs about actions or habits with C and E. So there's like a complete division of labor

or partitioning functionally between these structurally different parts of the neural network and structurally different and functionally different parts of the pomdp yet they're integrated in unified loss functions or unified imperatives

so it's like there's extreme separability of perception and action on both sides of the figure one divide but also they're integrated but they're separate and that's what kind of grants it the best of both worlds because if they were any more integrated you couldn't really pull them apart

if they were any less integrated then the imperative the loss function or the variational free energy would be ad hoc and unprincipled but there's kind of a middle ground where they have a principled integration but still a distinguishment right this is caused by you know network structure defined uh


SPEAKER_00:
or it is because the structure of Bayesian network defined in POMDP.

model.

Both of them define the causal relationship between elements or quantities.

Its substrate is

not important.

So its relationship, causal relationship is crucial to determine the cost function or its fixed point in this context.

So that's why we can see that analogy.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, there's a few technical points I think we can now go into, and then there will be some more general points about applications and intelligence.

So first, the code availability statement.

Awesome to see that the MATLAB scripts are available.

and also archived on Zenodo.

So here is the GitHub repo for reverse engineering.

Do you want to give any overview descriptions of what people can expect to see in this repo?

And also what about using MATLAB?

Why did you use MATLAB?

What advantages or limitations do you see in MATLAB?


SPEAKER_00:
So because this is a very simple simulation, so MATLAB is sufficient to encode the whole script.

And so we also try some visualization in the MATLAB.

See here, if you run the script, then

you can see the process of an agent solving the maze task.


SPEAKER_04:
What do they do in the maze task?


SPEAKER_00:
So here, the aim of this agent

is to reach the right-hand side of this maze.

And so because this is a typical example of a delayed modulation task, that's why we select the maze task.

So to achieve this maze task, agent required to make some plan to

be able to select a good decision.

Because without planning, you may encounter the wall and cannot go further and you may fail the maze.

But with planning, it is possible to see the path to reach the right-hand side of this space.


SPEAKER_04:
So does it know its x position?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it received a state from neighboring 11 times 11 cells, which is shown in the bottom part.

Yeah, this all most left figure indicate the observation, so 11 times 11 state.

around the agent position.

Now agent is on the right-hand side of the maze at the goal position, and it observes a neighboring state.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, a few interesting things.

Here, it's looking off the right end.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_04:
And it has this kind of periodic belief in the key distribution.

Why?


SPEAKER_00:
I think it is because when the agent is in the middle point of maze, then

All neighboring state is in the maze.

So there is a path, and there is a wall.

So this makes some periodicity, because maze have some structures.

And actually, it have a periodic structure.

And only at the goal position, then right-hand side becomes a wall.

But it is not common for this agent.

This is because this agent shows such periodic patterns.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah the streets are one wide and they tend to be separated by one so we see this periodicity what is um the numbers in this middle bottom plot and what does the checkerboard represent


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Here, Qs and Qd correspond to possible expectation about the state and the decision.

So middle panel indicate decision posterior.

And decision here, we characterize decision as a sequence of four-step

So each action corresponds to a movement to right or left or up or down.

And we consider a four-step sequence of that action, which is expressed as D. So it has four power of four possibilities. 256.

Yeah, 256.

So this is plotted on a x-y coordinate.

Because in the middle panel, the middle point corresponds to the current position of agent.

And with the four-step movement, agent can go one of any colored position.

And the color brightness correspond to the expectation about the agent decision.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, this is very interesting.

If we just were to think about you're in a point, and you can go up, down, left, right, you have four moves.

Naively, it sounds like, well, it should look like a Gaussian blur.

Most of those should cancel out and then it should become rarer and rarer monotonically.

But actually you start in the middle, you can't end up on these white squares because it's like one, two, three, and then you have to leave.

So it's kind of like horses in chess or other pieces where actually their embodiment, like it's very unexpected that you can't in four moves, end up next to where you began when you can be so much further.

And then we see this kind of like embodied inferential prior with QS.

that embodies regularity beliefs about the width of the road and the separation of the roads.

And then there's these like embodied action priors and real consequences that have to do with the structure of movement.

So what it's doing, it's thinking,

about policies of length four.

There's 256 policies of length four.

There's some degeneracy because there's obviously not 256 squares here.

So while only one policy is going to take you up, up, up, up, up, down, down, down, down, down, other squares are reachable.

Like the center square is probably the mode because it can be reached at least a handful of ways.

and then at each time point it's basically saying okay I know where my X position is and given my local 11 by 11 view I'm trying to plan to go right oh

then here through time in the simulation here it starts at 30 something it quickly figures out how to get to about 40. and then it's kind of going up and down on 40 but it can't really break out because all of these bottom four routes are closed it has a breakout and then very quickly it hits another plateau around 60.

right then it kind of has a very nice breakout and in just a few steps goes very far so what is dopamine doing or how is dopamine helping it in the Plateau and then to break out of the Plateau


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, so this agent runs this particular maze structure

through many trials so before training it failed to reach the goal but after training it achieved such a such a nice behavior so to achieve this the role of dopamine is that we design a gamma function such that if

the agent can move rightward with some distance during some time limit, then risk becomes small.

So like, say, gamma equals 0, so no risk situation.

In that sense, in that case, this agent updates synaptic weights through Hebbian plasticity.

But if the agent fails to go rightward with some distance during a limited time frame, then gamma becomes large, like 0.6, which is larger than the average 0.5.

design that drawing in such situation

anti-Hebbian plasticity occurred instead of Hebbian plasticity.

So anti-Hebbian plasticity indicate, so works as the disassociation between the current state and current decisions, because the current decision doesn't work.

It's not good decision.

So we try to make

the agent forget that particular decision rules through the modulation of heavy and plasticity done by gamma factor.

So this can be analog to the dopaminergic modulation of heavy and plasticity.


SPEAKER_04:
so if the policy is resulting in the expected outcome gamma stays at 0.5 the policy is as risky or consequential as expected and then the policy can either go better than expected

which facilitates learning to support that decision to be made more, or the outcome of the policy can be worse than expected, which disassociates previous conceptions to discourage that kind of behavior.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

A crucial point is that this association is done with a different time frame in the sense that we consider multiplication of current risk and past decisions to average

over past to present Hebbian product.

This makes an association between past decision sequence and the current risk, which enables to optimize the decision to minimize the future risk.

It is just a shift of timeframe.


SPEAKER_04:
So here, risk is being used in

a formal sense similar to how it's used in economics which is the associated uncertainty of outcomes with respect to a policy where does danger come into play like what if there was a adversary in the maze or something that was dangerous how does this kind of model accommodate or hunger

or different kinds of competitions because right now it's basically just trying to diffuse right word with a bias right but how do different kind of um situational elements become integrated into the generative model and generative process okay


SPEAKER_00:
Any of those factors can be involved in a risk factor, a single risk factor.

So you can actually design risk factor because risk factor modulates generative model.

So that's why agent try to minimize the risk through Bayesian brief updating.

But the risk itself is in some sense outside of such a Bayesian framework.

So we can design arbitrary risk.

So it may involve some danger


SPEAKER_04:
factor any any any other factor and this simulation it is a pomdp or it is a neural network and what scripts might we look at to understand the structure of the maze agent


SPEAKER_00:
OK, it is basically expressed using the quantity in HomeDP for tractability.

But for example, if you see the MDP, well, this is made as MDP learning, probably.

okay uh there is a variable sim type uh on the in the definition of yes same type correspond to the type of simulation so if it's one or two it becomes a form dp or neural network to my understanding well

In this particular example, we use the, let's say,

Oh, maybe it's not a good example.

The difference is unclear in there.

Yeah, well, there's no difference in this script as well.

So maybe another example.

Let's see.


SPEAKER_04:
What is MDP init is initiating the markup decision process?


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

It's just determining the initial state of the home DB simulation.

And if we compute the variational free energy or risk, MDP risk, compute the risk function.

So basically, we use the neural network

structure computation in this particular setup.

So when you click maze.m, then in the line 13.1,

line 31, we determined that the same type is 2.

This corresponds to neural network architecture.

So there is a very slight difference between home DP architecture and neural network architecture, because assuming neural network architecture corresponds to considering

If you choose the POMDP architecture, then

we sometimes use the D-gamma function to compute the posterior expectation about parameters.

But in the neural network modeling, the D-gamma function doesn't appear, but it is replaced with the logarithm of some function.

And asymptotically speaking, the difference between the gamma function of something and the logarithm function of something is asymptotically the same.

So that's why we can transform HomeDP to neural network architecture when the number of samples is sufficiently large.


SPEAKER_04:
Which form do you expect performs better under small or large amounts of data?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, for large amounts of data, they work in the same manner.

For small amounts of samples, I'm not

I'm not fully sure, but it corresponds to the assumption about the posterior belief distribution.

So if you assume Dirichlet distribution, then your resulting functional form is something that uses the D-gamma function.


SPEAKER_04:
in terms of bayesian inference probably which is optimal well probably all right let's return to the earliest questions from today so um in your script which people can reference there's basically a toggle

between having it in SIM type one or SIM type two, corresponding to the POMDP and the neural network.

What about if there's a published neural network or POMDP?

How can we use this architecture to create a translation

Is there any difference in this kind of like translating models in the wild?

Different than the full construction of a special script that can speak both languages.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, in terms of script, there's no difference, asymptotic difference, right?

So they work in the same manner.

So only translation of variable is so you can

you can see the same source code in two different ways.

So if you see that this is a neural network simulation, then it is translated as a neural network.

Or if you see that this is a POMDP, then it's POMDP.


SPEAKER_04:
so for some neural network being used in an industrial setting how would we get from the neural network to a pomdp and where would where or how would that representation be valuable


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

The important point is that we consider a particular form of neural network, which is called canonical neural network architecture.

So only when we assume this class of neural network, then you can find the exact correspondence to a particular form of POMDP.

Otherwise, you need to establish another equivalence between another form of neural network architecture and some sort of Bayesian model.

This may be expressed by POMDP, but maybe not so straightforward to be expressed as the conventional POMDP architecture.


SPEAKER_04:
So what is it about the canonical neural network architecture that facilitates its translation into the POMDP form?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, first of all, it assumes a sigmoidal activation function.

It is nicely correspond to entropy term in the POMDP equations, POMDP formulations.

So that's why we can create clear mapping.

So yeah, in other words,

Simply speaking, they have the same nonlinearity.

That's why this translation is very easy.

with another non-linearity or a neural network equation, then we need to find another type of entropy equation or another type of prior distribution, which is very non-trivial.


SPEAKER_04:
How does one even go about doing that research?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, if you want to go that direction, then I think the first step is to find the prior brief, which makes... Find the prior brief and

find the equivalence between a particular neural network architecture and a particular Bayesian model.


SPEAKER_04:
This sigmoidal activation is interesting.

It corresponds to

general patterns seen in psychophysics like two objects that are the same weight you're gonna have a 50 chance of saying that one is heavier and then initially the difference has the most um returns on that decision being made accurately yeah

and then as it crosses some threshold where it just is the beyond a noticeable difference the decision becomes essentially probabilistic like the firing curve becomes saturated the neuron is at the it has a very low belief about zero or very high belief about zero or one flip that um

so there there is a nice grounding of that kind of a sigmoidal response curve with respect to stimuli differences and it has of course tractable analytical properties but it also just happens to be a good response summarizer


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, you're right.

So sigmoidal function is also known as a psychometric function.

As you say, we observe that characteristic in many psychophysical experiments.

And the previous work also said that even at the single neuronal level, the same behavior

were observed, which means that for each neural activity, we can re-observe the similar property, which is sometimes called as neurometric function, which have the form of sigmoidal activation function.

So it is a nice reason to design neural network architecture using a sigmoidal function.


SPEAKER_04:
All right, let's cover a few questions in the chat from Dave, and then in the end, turn to some general thoughts.

Okay, this was when we were looking at figure three.

So you described these vectors or matrices.

What kind of matrix or vector did you describe them as?

Block matrix?


SPEAKER_00:
Block matrix.

Block?

Block.

Meaning what?

Okay.

Block matrix or block vector is a vector of vector or matrix of matrix.

So imagine that


SPEAKER_04:
Sorry, just zoom.

Just glitch.

Just repeat the last piece.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

Unstable.

So, well, block matrix means that so element of matrix is a matrix.

So, let's say 2 by 2 matrix like matrix in the yeah.

you're pointing.

So this here, W1 hat is a matrix.

And W0 hat is another matrix.

And combining four matrices, we define a single block matrix.


SPEAKER_04:
All right.

Thank you.

So Dave then asks,

The hosts of Machine Learning Street Talk, number 67, with Carl Fristen, another podcast where Fristen has spoken, pressed Carl Fristen on why is it so important that most of the values in a generative model matrix assume values of exactly zero?

Why is it important that generative model matrices are sparse?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm not fully sure.

I think there is some context before that point.

I think under a particular situation, then, yeah, as you say, the many elements in the matrix of Genting model should be zero, but I'm not sure if it's a general statement or not.


SPEAKER_04:
What do you think about compressed analyses on sparse matrices?

Is that a useful technique or direction?


SPEAKER_00:
you can use that knowledge to construct a model.

So you can use that knowledge to make more accurate inference.

So in that sense, generally speaking, such assumption should be useful.

For example, as you said, it would be possible to use some

sparse prior to restrict the value of parameter.

It is, in principle, same as assuming some L1 norm.

to design the distribution, to design the prior distribution, which is, mathematically speaking, exactly the same as considering Lasso regression.

Yes.


SPEAKER_04:
We've explored a little bit how from a canonical neural network to a particular form of a POMDP gives us some semantics and interpretability around the dynamics and plasticity of the neural network.

What do we gain by taking a stated POMDP generative model

and deriving an analogous neural network?

Do we gain access to efficient computation, new software packages, different applications?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, if one use POMDP and

one's goal is to design an efficient Bayesian model, then I think POMDP expression is sufficient.

So you don't need to consider neural network architecture, probably, because Bayesian inference or POMDP

architecture and the Bayesian formulation is designed to achieve some sort of mathematically optimal inference and decision making.

So it itself is an optimal scheme.

But if one needs to consider a link between

Bayesian inference and biological substrate, then this mapping is crucial.

So simply speaking, we assume that a brain performs Bayesian inference, but its substrate is still unclear.

So we need to link the Bayesian quantity to biological quantities.

So this mapping, this equivalence, helps us to its translation.

So when you start from HomeDP model, then this translation facilitates the process of finding its neuronal substrate.

So once you translate that to neural network quantities, then it helps us, it facilitates

experimental validation or application to real data.

So if its modeling is apt for a particular neural network, neural circuit architecture, then it should provide some prediction about the architecture or dynamics

empirical data, right?

So first we start from Bayesian model, which is not necessary to be equal to empirical data.

So maybe there is some mapping, but its mapping is not straightforward.

We may have multiple mappings, but once you translate Bayesian model to a particular neural network architecture, then

mapping or relationship between empirical data to such a particular neural network model is straightforward.

So it helps us to apply Bayes to an explanation of empirical data.

That's my thought.


SPEAKER_04:
is it fair to say that neural networks have found wide recent application because they facilitate statistical learning in cases where the inference problem has not been a priori well specified one can just have a folder of images and a list of labels and just say here's the data

run it through this architecture or this architecture explorer and so with this concordance we gain new interpretability into those settings that kind of arose from ill-specified inference problems

And then on the other hand, for problems that we already have well specified in terms of a POMDP generative model of a particular form, we gain the connection to actually implement it with empirical data and bring it into relevant industrial settings.

what systems or phenomena are promising to continue research on the maze example obviously is a simple case but are you continuing research into more advanced computational agents robotic animal oh hello


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, one can design a more sophisticated agent which performs some difficult task based on a canonical neural network.

But there is some limitation, clear limitation,

on that direction, right?

So yeah, I should emphasize that a class of canonical neural network which correspond to a particular POMDP is much smaller than a general POMDP framework.

So there are some limitations, a list of limitations.

So if one's goal is to design a sophisticated Bayesian engine to perform some task or control robot, then one direction is just to forget such a limitation.

seek the mathematical optimality.

And another direction is biological plausibility.

So if one wants to make some agent which is biologically plausible, then this correspondence is crucial because it tells us

limitation, the biological limitation, through the existence or non-existence of such a mapping between POMDP and particular neural network architecture.

So it would be useful to consider a biological substrate to achieve a difficult task.

And that task would be related to large-dimensional image processing, image recognition, or sound recognition.

Such a multi-modality can be involved, or decision can be

higher dimensional.

In the major task, we just consider the four direction of movement, but it can be extended to higher dimensionality, like arm movement, body movement, so on and so on.

So in principle, it can be extended in that direction.


SPEAKER_04:
Which directions or questions are you excited about?

Or what areas of studying the basis of biological and computational intelligence are relevant?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, so in terms of

The importance of canonical network, as you said, its virtue is a vertical plausibility.

So it would be nice that if we model some task which is conducted by real animal, and one already recorded some neural activity, brain activity,

Then we design a task which is exactly same as the task which is done by the animal, and then compare the simulated agent and MP-Curl data to discuss about the similarity or difference between the simulated agent and real.

animal, that would be very interesting direction of research.


SPEAKER_04:
yeah and if there could be some unexpected prediction or explanation right in the computational agent that would bolster the relationship and then um one other aspect is it would help with the reproducibility and the

documentation around behavioral studies if the computational agents were pre-registered and someone said we've already done the statistical power analyses and we've already explored with parameter sweeps

How many observations we need to make of the two-armed bandit?

How many observations of the three-armed bandit?

Should we do three mice a hundred times or a hundred mice three times?

Those are the total substance of designing research programs.

And so having a formal representation

of behavioral tasks that are being studied will help us design behavioral observations and experiments that aren't simply ad hoc.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

That's an interesting application.

So yeah, this framework helps to design the experimental setup itself.

And what we often consider is the prediction ability of this modeling canonical neural networks to predict

the scenario harmonization or dynamics

or the real neural network in the animal during the learning process.

So in principle, it is possible to predict the behavior after learning based only on data in the initial stage.

Because once we obtain some empirical data, then we can feed that data to design a particular canonical network.

And canonical neural network makes some self-organization through a minimization of cost function, which is exactly the same as Bayesian belief updating under a particular generative model.

which means that its dynamics go through the shortest path on the free energy landscape, which means that we can make some quantitative prediction about the synaptic trajectory or neural activity or any kind of parameters.

So we demonstrated that using in vitro neural network and uploaded some pre-print recently.

So at least at the level of in vitro network, which is much simpler than VR brain,

we could predict the self-organization of in vitro network using this canonical network architecture.

This supports the plausibility of the free energy principle because

this canonical network predicts the self-organization through the variational free energy minimization and its solution, its result, has a tight correlation to actual self-organization.


SPEAKER_04:
That's a very interesting experiment.

So what

animal were the neurons from and what was measured about these neurons?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, so that in vitro network is obtained from a rat embryo

we use cortical cells to make that in vitro network.

And task is a sort of causal inference task, which can be designed in the form of HomeDP.

So imagine that.

So we usually simulate agents that receive

signals generated by HomeDP generative process and process some Bayesian task.

So we just replace that Bayesian agent to a real in vitro neural network.

So we stimulate neuron with some signal which is made by some hidden sources through likelihood mapping.

The question is whether the in vitro network can infer the hidden states through some self-organization.

And they can.

They could infer the hidden causes.


SPEAKER_04:
What does it look like functionally when the neural network has succeeded at inferring the hidden causes?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, the direct observation is done by the number of response spikes to a particular pattern of sensory input.

So again, we can see a clear correspondence between

neural activity level and posterior belief about hidden state.

So here we see an early evoked response to an electrical stimuli.

We see the response from 10 to 30 milliseconds after each stimulation, and we compute the number of spikes.

And that spike changes their preference in the sense that some neurons learn to preferentially respond to source 1 but not source 2, which is not a response to input itself, but it looks like a response to a particular source.

So it is inference, which is empirical evidence that neural network actually perform some sort of causal inference in a manner consistent with variational Bayesian inference.

And then we compute another quantity in Bayesian inference.

In the real vertical data, we show that

firing threshold factor is consistent with the prior belief about hidden state.

And we also compute the synaptic weight statistically through some connection strength estimation method and show that

So estimated synaptic strength is consistent with something encoding posterior belief about parameters as expected by the theory.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, we looked at Table 2 earlier, and this is almost like the next step after the theoretical concordance.

is all right, well, let's measure the release of a neurotransmitter or the empirical synaptic strength or the firing threshold or all these different features in different empirical systems.

So what systems, what experimental systems does your group work in?


SPEAKER_00:
That in vitro system was made when I was a PhD student.

So that is the experiment we done in my previous lab.

And now I move

to the RIKEN Institute.

And I'm a principal investigator of a salary unit.

So now, actually, we don't use any experimental setup.

So any experimental validation is done with some collaboration.

So although I cannot say a detail about that collaboration, but yeah, we learned some.

a collaborating work about the validation of celery using uh various animals yeah so we hope we can show some interesting result following results using animal data very um interesting yeah well it speaks a lot to the stage


SPEAKER_04:
that our field is in in certain ways where we've seen a lot of graphics that are suggestive this paper and the building on the previous 2020 paper made a suggestive possibility

much closer to a analytically demonstrated translation and then took the next step incrementally into the in silica agent and so it's only natural to then explore different embodied systems as well um

there any other sections that you wanted to like look at or highlight or any other topics about the paper or adjacencies or active inference that you think are interesting to go into yeah


SPEAKER_00:
So OK, then I would like to mention about some limitation of this paper, which is not directly discussed in the papers.

So for example, well, we focus on a discrete state space model.

So we avoid to assume some substrates that encode

the covariance of the distribution.

So once you assume POMDP, then it is categorical distribution.

So it is different from assuming Gaussian distribution characterized by mean and variance.

So the neuronal substrate of variance

is still unclear.

And we now try to figure out that.

So this is one direction of limitation.

And another limitation is that, thanks to a simple ODP structure, in this paper, we don't care about the hierarchical

you know, optimization.

But generally, it is crucial to update parameters through hierarchical optimization through some backpropagation-like computation.

Although it is unclear whether backpropagation itself occurs in the real brain, but we still have some alternatives that achieve such a

optimization, and its neural substrate is still unclear.

And this paper does address that direction.


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm.

Hmm.


SPEAKER_04:
Another area I'm wondering about is like, where in neural structures is the learning reflected?

Where is the function and learning reflected?

Well, sometimes it has to do with not just structural tweaking, but the presence or absence of synapses.

So obviously this model does not expand into synaptogenesis, synaptic pruning, let alone neurogenesis and neuroapoptosis, which we mentioned in the previous discussion, but understanding how these larger scale structural changes

which are certainly important in biological systems, become reflected in artificial neural networks, and then how that translates all the way back to POMDP, and then whether we could go the other way, what kinds of POMDP structures in their neural network realization would have structural modification?

You can imagine a POMDP structure

that does structure learning but the neural network doesn't have structural change or there's a pomdp that doesn't do structural learning but it's met it's manifested by a neural network that does have a structural change element

so structure is doing something very different in these two different categories of model and then also um even within neural firing which is different amongst different species and so on there's different aspects of what that firing is

that would have different implications for the actual biological substrate of cognition.

Like the simple connection is firing rate to posterior belief.

Average firing rate, no change in posterior.

Reduce the firing rate if the posterior should be going down, increase it if it should be going up.

Or maybe there are neurons that have a flipped valence, but the same type of relationship.

But there's other...

firing patterns like spike time dependent plasticity synchronization amongst different brain regions there's a lot of things that don't change the rate overall that again from the biological systems we know that those phenomena and mechanism are important for different cognitive processes

so there will be many many years of a fruitful relationship um i'm gonna bring in this picture that that um alexandra had taken maybe we need a third panel in figure one because these three systems moving between them

is going to be the substance of the field for a long time and there's maybe other edges to build but understanding how artificial neural networks intermediate between the empirical measurements and manipulations that we can make of real neural systems and the

interpretability and factorize ability of POMDPs, it might be a bridge too far to go from the POMDP to the neuron.

You could always use this technique, but it would be a purely descriptive statistic type approach.

But it's so interesting that by intermediating through a formal connection established in figure one, I mean in equation one, but also shown here, then we can kind of extend the chain of explanation, prediction, control, design,

all the way on through and that just unlocks like an incredible amount of neuroscience that hasn't been formalized mathematically and an incredible amount of generative models that have been specified for different learning settings sometimes even by analogy to biological settings

But the metaphor remains just a metaphor until it's possible to intermediate with this type of neural network development.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

That's a crucial point.

It is easy to imagine that real data or real phenomena can be modeled using very realistic

neuron model or glial model, synaptic model.

We believe that it is possible.

And then real data, sorry, real model is not necessarily tractable, not necessarily useful because it is too much complicated to analyze something.

So we use some reduction usually, mathematically speaking, which correspond to topological transformation to make the model simpler.

And then we need to consider the translation of that simplified neural network model, because neural network model itself is not explainable, which just represents some dynamics.

And its functional meaning is not clear.

But thanks to the Bayesian framework,

a very nice framework to lend the explainability.

And this translation, this correspondence, helps us to link such phenomena-based equation modeling and functional-based equations.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, one paper from 2017 that was much discussed by some.

Could a neuroscientist understand a microprocessor?

And this group with Jonas and Cording, they had a simulation of a microprocessor.

from uh earlier video game console I believe and then using the analogy of like the transistors and their connections as neural firing and structural connectivity they were able to simulate experimental settings input and action and then make measurements from like every neuron

including doing lesions and loss of functions and so on.

And it turns out that a lot of the techniques that are used to derive scientific explanation from analogous data collected from a biological system

those techniques which ostensibly should be isolating functional explanations, in fact, did not isolate effective explanations.

You could have a deletion over here that induces some statistical change all the way over here, and that may or may not be a useful clue towards the function of even sub-circuits.

And so I think that was a wake-up call with respect to the interpretability of simply this connection between the biological and the neural network.

This connection alone is of limited applicability

even when the neural network model becomes so complex as to recapitulate the biological phenomena, you're never under any guarantee that you're going to recover interpretability.

You may have just created an atomic level simulation of the phenomena, but of course a map that is the same scale as the phenomena isn't a map.

It's just a copy that has no more interpretability.

And it's almost like what is now extended, again, as we kind of just summarize this and think about how we move forward, is that connection can now be extended into the space of interpretable causal models, right?

and the generalized Bayesian graphical computational frameworks and all the heuristics that we can then use like variational Bayes and all these other methods.

So it'd be interesting to look back at different data sets of in vitro and in vivo and in silico neural activation, especially if the task was of this constrained set of POMDPs

And it was already amenable because as you brought up, other settings would require a little bit more theory development before we understand what POMDP family would be applicable.

Cool.

Well, do you have any final thoughts or questions?


SPEAKER_00:
I don't.

Do you hop?


SPEAKER_04:
I want to download the MATLAB scripts and generate the figures, play around with a few of these parameters.

Like I see that you can change how far the entity can see.

And then with these models, I'm also always curious about the computational complexity.

Like if you extended the planning horizon from four to five or you dropped it down to three.

what is the runtime consequences and what is the performance consequences and where might we be able to use single or swarms of really simple agents

maybe even making binary decisions and achieve high performance.

And where do we really need to move into these large combinatoric spaces in order to solve problems and the kinds of complex planning problems that we solve, whether it's planning our day or planning our week,

Are those more like true deep horizon planning problems with extensive consideration of counterfactuals and calculation of alternatives?

Or are those actually composite decisions that are made up of smaller, simpler sub decisions?

that we may or may not have flexibility to restructure.

So that a decision, a complex chess maneuver, a sacrifice in chess or another game, it may be possible to model that as a deep horizon scan or a kind of intuitive heuristic

for inappropriate skilled entity.


SPEAKER_00:
For for this particular two layer structure, there is a clear limitation about the, you know,

the horizon of the search, forward search, because it doesn't use forward prediction.

It uses a post-diction approach.

So it's a clear limitation.

But still, it may have some performance, ability to achieve some level of performance.


SPEAKER_04:
That actually, I mean, that provides even another way to look at planning.

So the two ways I was describing planning, as it's often described in the PMDP literature, is again, is it a true deep horizon consideration or is it just short-term heuristics or nested models that are short?

And I think that this paper says maybe neither.

Maybe it's purely the fictive causality on the past.


SPEAKER_02:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_04:
that leads to the emergence of sentience and maybe even teleological planning-like behavior through the ongoing reconsideration of the consequences of past action.

But it's neither a short nor a long-term planning challenge.

It's actually like a memory and learning challenge, and no planning occurs.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

But indirect planning...


SPEAKER_04:
you know planning element is involving c matrix planning as a phenomena occurs and de-risking through time occurs but there um but it says something quite interesting and deep that that phenotype or function could be enacted by a system that

explicitly looks a long way ahead explicitly looks a short way ahead or moves forward and looks backwards only right which is what they sometimes say about the past and the future so that may be a very biologically plausible form of learning

And it's already intimately connected with the dynamics and the plasticity in terms of an integrated loss function.

So these are all excellent directions to keep learning on.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

And I'm also interested in the vertical implementation of such a short-term or long-term forward prediction and planning.

And I hope to find some nice connectivity to such an implementation of Bayesian model and the implementation in real brain network.


SPEAKER_04:
cool and also i'm i'm always curious about the invertebrate brain as a ant researcher and so many of the micro architectures as well as the regional architectures that people discuss are mammalian centric which makes sense

the mammalian cortical column and the relationship with the dopaminergic midbrain and the cortical regions and the spinal reflex arc those are all important systems of interest yet the micro and meso anatomy of the invertebrate nervous system is pretty distinct

so our model should be able to describe neural and cognitive systems of course across invertebrates and vertebrates so i look forward to also seeing like what those models of the invertebrate nervous system and collective behavior where you could have some type of

backwards looking risk inference of the swarm who knows who knows well we really appreciate the time that you took for these discussions I think they are immensely important and we wish you the best of luck in these continued directions

Okay, that's it.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

See you next time.

Bye.

Bye.
