## 8JrGE02KzuY

SPEAKER_02:
all right we are live welcome everybody thank you for joining us live or in replay this is actin flab live stream number 23.0 it's may 27 2021 and we're going to be talking about the paper embodied skillful performance and i'm daniel i'm here with blue and dean so thanks for joining you too

Welcome everybody to the ActInf Lab.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links that we have laid out here.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome to contribute here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, we'll be doing our best.

We're heading into June so soon, in just a few weeks, and we'll be having discussion number 23.1 and .2 on this paper.

So today it's gonna be about background and context, and then we're looking forward on June 8th and 15th, 2021, to be talking about this in a group setting.

So as stated, the goal of this 23.0 is to set the context for the upcoming .1 and .2 videos.

We're going to be discussing the paper, Embodied Skillful Performance, where the action is, which is a collaboration of Hippolyto, Baltieri, Friston, and Ramsted.

And just like the other .0s, it's an introduction and a first pass to some of these ideas.

It's not a review or a final word.

We're gonna go over the aims and claims, the abstract roadmap, and then kind of walk through the figures plus a few of these ideas because there are a lot of cool ideas and it's an embodied paper.

It's about our movement and our behavior in the world.

So hopefully that will lead all of us to have some fun ideas about what it means and where it applies.

And of course, we're looking forward to the .1 and .2 discussions.

So you can write any questions during this stream in the live chat, or you can write a comment, or find a way to get that question to us otherwise, and get in touch if you want to participate.

So...

to slide six we're checking out this paper embodied skillful performance where the action is and before we get to the aims and claims maybe each of you any just top of the head thoughts what made you excited or curious about this paper


SPEAKER_01:
I don't want to talk too much about this because it was a great paper, but I, again, could go off into the wilderness very rapidly.

So I want to just kind of stick to what the basics of the paper are and we'll worry about other ideas in point one and point two for me.


SPEAKER_02:
Sounds great.

Thanks for that contribution, Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
I've been just thinking a lot about, you know, related to this paper and other work I'm involved in right now, like how beliefs and desires and intentions map to action.

So it was really kind of cool to see this perspective.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

So maybe Blue, want to start with the aim of the paper?

Or I'll read it.

Sure, sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
I was muted.

It says, the aim of this paper is to discuss critically the limitations of instructionist control theoretic models of skillful performance.

So that's the overall aim.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

Nice that they said it so clearly.

So that's what they're trying to do.

They're bringing up what's the instructionist control theory model of skillful performance, which we're going to cover the background on.

And then they're going to show that that instructionist assumption in its strong and weak form is imbued in the optimal motor control theory or OMCT framework.

And then coming in to save the day, Active Inference is going to be proposed as an alternative framework for understanding skillful performance.

And they then conclude by suggesting that if we understand these generative models within Active Inference as formal tools,

then we may be able to have an account of skilled performance that's based upon interactions rather than instructions.

So that's kind of cool because instructions are how computers work and education is also sometimes framed as being about instruction rather than interaction.

So here is the abstract, and then either of you are welcome to add a thought or it stands alone.

When someone masters a skill, their performance looks to us like second nature.

It looks as if their actions are smoothly performed without explicit knowledge-driven online monitoring of their performance.

Contemporary computational models in motor control theory, however, are instructionist.

That is, they cast skillful performance as a knowledge-driven process.

optimal motor control theory omct as representative par excellence of such approaches casts skillful performance as an instruction instantiated in the brain that needs to be executed a motor command this paper aims to show the limitations of such instructionist approaches to skillful performance we specifically address the question of whether the assumption of control theoretic models is warranted

Then they lay out the three sections or four sections of the paper.

The first section of this paper examines the instructionist assumption according to which skillful performance consists of the execution of theoretical instructions harnessed in motor representations.

The second and third sections characterize the implementation of motor representations as motor commands with a special focus on the formulations from OMCT.

The final sections of this paper examine predictive coding and active inference, behavioral modeling frameworks that descend but are distinct from OMCT, and argue that the instructionist control theoretic assumptions are ill-motivated in light of new developments in active inference.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Dean?

So I think that there is a place for command and control, but it's not the only place or the sort of all-embracing place.

And I think that's what the paper sets out to try to show.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

They don't say there is no such thing as instruction.

They just suggest that for talking about motor control and for skilled performance especially, maybe there's a better way to frame it.

The roadmap is shown here.

So it starts with an introduction section.

They then introduce their whipping horse, the scapegoat, the instructionist model of skillful performance, and discuss how motor representations are playing the role essentially of motor commands in a sort of brain instructing the body model of motor behavior.

They talk about how motor commands are representational, and we'll talk a little bit about representations as well, and then connect the ideas of motor commands and instructionism to optimal control theory.

So basically saying in order to achieve that kind of optimal or even adequate control, instructions are being sent to the motor department of the university from a non-motor department like the nervous system.

In section six, less control, more action, they try to move the discussion from simply optimal control to a broader consideration of the dynamics of biological systems framed generally as in the case of predictive coding and active inference.

And then in section seven, they discuss how motor control, again, building up this argument that it's about interactions, not just instructions, they frame motor control as being a mode of sensory motor engagement with the world.

And even that word sensory motor kind of suggests that there's gonna be a non-duality between sense and action.

which brings us, of course, to active inference and the conclusion.

And also then after the conclusion, there's a box where they define active inference and free energy and some other terms.

So that's the roadmap.

Any thoughts on the roadmap or we'll just keep on going?

Nice.

Okay, the keywords were laid out by the authors.

Skillful performance, it's right there in the title.

So not too surprising that it's a keyword.

They also talk about optimal control theory.

instructionism, motor representation, action-oriented representations, and our favorite, active inference.

So we're going to now meander through these keywords and

define it, try to use the author's own words to see how they framed the keyword.

And then also just because we're having fun here in this trio, we took it in a few different ways and brought up some related ideas.

And so I think this will be a fun walk through.

So I'll read the author's definition of skillful performance, and then both of you please add.

So skillful performance in the paper is defined as, as opposed to bare movements such as breathing and blinking, skillful performances are intelligent bodily activities which harness knowledge about how to perform certain movements expertly.

And just to describe some of the expert movements that we see on this slide, we have a basketball, a sports ball being played with a free throw.

We have a pilot.

This is kind of an extended skillful performance involving a flight deck in the cockpit.

We have various styles of dance and performance and martial arts and interaction, whether touching somebody or not touching somebody.

These are all skillful activities that people can train their entire life to enable the performance of.

So either of you, I'm sure you can jump in on this key term.

So blue first, then Dean.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
I'll jump in.

You know, I thought like, of course, these are all very physical and like sensory motor, but there's also, I mean, I guess all things are, but like music, I think was brought up in the paper that's not here.

And I think about stuff I've done, like, you know, and think about like surgery, right?

Like, like what a surgeon does, like they go, that is a skillful performance.

It might not be in front of others, but like, you have to just kind of know and

like guided by your kinesthetic memory, like any kind of aseptic technique, lab work.

I'm sure you've done some wet lab work, Daniel, like where it's like you come in and it's like you just have to flow through it.

Yeah, pipetting.

Yep.


SPEAKER_02:
They have robots for that now.

And that's the joke.

How do you know someone's a biologist?

They can take the cap of the toothpaste off and put it back on with one hand.

That's what we do with bottles of reagents.


SPEAKER_00:
It takes so much time to think about it at first.

And then you just do it without thinking about it.

So there's this ironic where you're consciously trying to do it with one hand and not touch the other thing.

And then after you do it for so many years, it just becomes second nature.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it was interesting to me because I don't know when the line is crossed and you go from an autonomic habituated response, the part about blinking, the ones that I don't think about versus the ones when my spouse says,

She looks at me and I wasn't aware of it in the past, but she was using those blinks in a certain way and was very effective.

I went way over my head, but she was sending a signal and it worked.

So is it, again, it can come down even to, it can come to thinking and not thinking about it.

And it can also come to sometimes what we notice and don't notice.


SPEAKER_02:
i agree and not to um generalize too rapidly but perhaps active inference can describe the entire continuum of performance and so we're almost dismantling this idea of skilled performance because that makes it sound like there's going to be a distinction between skilled and unskilled whereas walking is a skill and there's so many different capacities and constraints and ways that the body adapts to

itself and its needs so it's something that you can learn and anyone who's had a physical injury or needs to go to physical therapy it's relearning as well so i think it's a big way to talk about motor behavior but it's almost like saying if we can clear this high bar if we can have an active inference account that is playing piano or doing martial arts then surely we can have one that is more at a unskilled level but it's still a skill

Okay, nice.

So then I'll play the video.

I don't think you'll see it, but I'm playing the video in the background of Elo Wan, a plant hybrid, hybrid, plant robot hybrid.

And this is from the MIT Media Lab.

So Blue, what made you want to put this video here while it's playing?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just kept thinking, like, they kept using the terminology motor plant.

And having seen this video, like, I was like, oh, motor plant.

That reminds me of this motor plant that's attached to a motor.

And the, you know, mechanisms that are used for that.

motion in in the plant um which is is awesome so i just i don't know wanted to put it in there and just see if maybe our active inference active in for plants applies across you know all domains of life


SPEAKER_02:
yep very nice so it's kind of like we know that active inference is a scale free framework but also it sort of doesn't have a human centered frame either so this is a plant that in the video you can see it's using its signaling processes to react to stimuli and move back and forth between these two lights

So it's kind of like a person in a mobility device.

You're giving it a new affordance by modifying its niche.

And so just like we're rethinking skilled versus unskilled, we're also maybe rethinking who gets to have behavior.

And that made me think of a paper from 1989 by my PhD advisor, Deborah Gordon, and a collaborator, Silberton, where they laid out a framework for plant behavior.

And they just plainly wrote out, here we use the term behavior to mean what a plant or animal does in the course of an individual's lifetime in response to some event or change in its environment.

so it's like it's what things do you know just do it that's Behavior and that's kind of how action is in active inference whether your active state is you can only move one finger or you can move all your fingers those are your active state affordances so we want to have a framework that is able to accommodate differences in individuals or even species in how they behave


SPEAKER_01:
Can I add one thing, Daniel?

I think that the adding of the wheels, and you've heard the cliche, it's a game changer.

But essentially, the rules changed in that video.

And when the rules change, the behaviors can modify.

And I think that's one of the things that comes out in this paper later on.

If we want to include that, we want to sort of inflate it up to that level.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

And the skillful performance of music, you know, if somebody is really good at like drumming on their own body or using their voice box or beatboxing, like those are all sort of onboard tools and affordances that we have.

People can clap really well and do all sorts of stuff like that.

But once you start talking about physical instrumentation, whether it's a spoon or a violin or a drum set, you're talking about kind of modifying your niche and being able to undertake skilled performance

with your new tools.

So again, extended, embedded, encultured, cognition, the four E's, active inference, it's right there.

And that's why we wanna think broadly about skilled performance here and invite into this conversation, whether a technical minded person or somebody who considers some of their own behaviors to be skilled performances, how does this remark on them?

it brings us to what the authors call the paradox of skillful performance.

So they write, here's the paradox, a seemingly paradoxical relationship between action and knowledge.

Action both requires knowledge and is inhibited by knowledge.

Skillful performance involves both an exquisite sensitivity to cultural norms and situational context, but also kind of requires us to put that aside, at least consciously, while it's happening.

How then to make sense of the relation between knowledge and skillful performance?

Surely knowledge is involved in skillful performance, but is it entirely in the form of a theory that ought to be executed as a top-down instruction?

Anything to add on this paradox?


SPEAKER_01:
I think that you can have thinking as doing and then you can have doing as doing.

And I think this is...

talking to some of the ideas around the quieting of the mind piece.

So instead of always having these commands coming through, you don't have to think about it so much anymore.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
I like the idea that knowledge inhibits.

So action requires knowledge, but it's also inhibited by it.

It lends itself to the kind of overthinking process.

You're overthinking it.

You're never going to get it.

I think someone was just speaking on Tuesday about like holding the butterfly.

Was it Steven?

You know, like, it's like when, when you grip an idea, like I want to ride a bicycle or play the piano, you have to hold it and like, let it rest on your hand, but don't like squeeze it or you'll, you'll kill the butterfly.

And that kind of like reminds me of this knowledge.

Like if you're overthinking the process of playing the piano, like you're going to get it all wrong.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

If you grab the handlebar too tight or grab your dance partner too tight, and then when you take it into the area like poetry recitation or playing a classical music piece, are they thinking about the sheet music?

Is their internal representation or knowledge what is enabling that performance?

That's kind of what we're gonna be exploring.

So they motivate that paradox as being something that

It has to be explained.

Why do people choke when they think too much about their golf swing or their tennis swing?

And we'll come back to flow and thinking about that later on.


SPEAKER_00:
There has to be like this correct relational distance from the task that you're trying to perform.

And I think that that is embodied by this sentence and action requires knowledge and is inhibited by it.

You have to be the right distance away from it.

Like if you're too close, it doesn't make sense.

And if you're too far away, it doesn't make sense.

Yep.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I just want to add one other thing.

Like yesterday, I was walking in the park, and there was three kids that were zooming down the hill on their scooters.

And the first kid...

was making the sound we like this, like not we as in she was having a good time, but she felt she had to put the reflective and the analytical on it because she was going first.

She wasn't, she wasn't thinking about how much fun she was having.

She was thinking about, Oh, I'm supposed to say this is exciting, even though I'm really not sure if I'm going to go off into the trees or whatever.

And so she,

It's fascinating how we kind of get habituated to this idea that in a cultural setting, we have to let others know we're having fun when really what we're trying to do is not fall off the scooter, right?

Like that's a big part of this overthinking piece.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

And a roller coaster where you can't change the way that the roller coaster is working, but it just erupts people screaming or something like that.

What is going on there?

Yeah.

Optimal or laughing in a standup comedy situation.

So optimal control theory.

So that's OCT.

And they define OCT is a field in mathematical optimization that deals with finding a control for a dynamical system.

But they spend most of the discussion, of course, with a focus on motor behavior.

And so they introduced the OCMT, optimal control motor theory.

and write, OMCT is a label for the modeling tools used to study motor behavior and its neural processing.

We target specifically OMCT to show that it rests on the instructionist assumption, which we're gonna cover, that the brain literally contains and leverages explicit instructions for movements.

So what did either of you think about OCMT?


SPEAKER_01:
I just thought it was really interesting because I would imagine that there would be some emotion on the part of the spotter, not the person on the handstand, if suddenly his cigarette fell out of his mouth.

I assume that's a cigarette that's in his mouth.

But he wouldn't even be aware of the fact that he lost something, that he was losing optimal control because his focus was off.

elsewhere in front of him.

So again, you have to kind of take this idea of skill and make sure that you understand what you're talking about.

Because yeah, there's probably a lot of skill perceived in the person doing the handstand.

But there's also other skills going off there that we don't give as much attention over to.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, there's the skill of standing up, which is a dynamic process.

There's holding an object in the lips, even of the observer.

And then there's the spotter's skill to know when to intervene and when not to intervene.

And half of the battle is knowing when not to move and when to just let it ride and trust in the partner.

So it's kind of cool that when people look at this photo, they might immediately be highlighting this sort of

difficult looking task, the stacked chairs and whatnot, but it's an idea that would help us explain this whole situation as active inference agents engaging in motor behavior potentially.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, it just asks us to redefine what command and control is, basically.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

So how about instructionism?

So on the left is a quote, which we're not going to read in full, but they do write down at the bottom, and I know, Blue, that we'll have a little bit to say on this from the genetics angle, but they write, following Wheeler and Clark's 1999 paper, yes, that Andy Clark, we will refer to this position as instructionism, which is the idea that skill is essentially of a theoretical nature mediated by knowledge.

We cast instructionism in terms of explicit instructions, that is, forms of knowledge that directly guide performance.

Like, okay, I'm supposed to run over to the left side of the stage when I hear the timpani, boom.

Applied to skillful performance, the instructionist assumption prescribes that instructions are harnessed in separable structures such as beliefs.

And then on the left side is the abstract and title of Wheeler and Clark 99,

which is actually a paper called Genic Representation About Genes, Reconciling Content and Causal Complexity.

So Blue, any thoughts on where genes come into play?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, it's all, right, like there's penetrance and there's, you know, all of these things come into this, you know, genetic relationship.

And so I think it's interesting to think about.

And also, I think as the authors point out that there's, you know, the genes aren't really the instructions for creating protein, right?

Like they are just the fundamental blueprint.

So they don't have such a direct relationship with action.

They're just like the belief system.

They're not the intention.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know.

We're going to spiral back to the mapping between genes and motor representations in a little bit, but just cool that they drew from a different area of philosophy and science to be building their instruction as point.

But for the next few slides, let's focus back in on the motor behavior.

So here we highlight a few different attributes of instructionism.

So if somebody is asking, well, like, what is instructionism or what are its characteristics?

Or how would I know if a theory is being cast in an instructionist frame?

Here in red, we have a few words like separability and its cousin modularity.

We have representational thinking, which we're going to come back to as well, and normativity, meaning how things should be done.

And these are quotes saying, instructionism saying that instructions come in the form of separable structures such as beliefs.

So that implies separability, modularity.

And then they also say that instructionism suggests that performance is enabled by motor representations, which harness knowledge about how a specific skillful performance should be executed.

Like if the instructions were to have you fall over, that's not how you get to a walking person.

So it's about how things should be.

And then if there's like something on your leg grabbing you down, it's about how you should escape.

So here's kind of an example of instructionism with a person chopping herbs.

And it's almost like you could imagine step one, first instruction, grip the herbs with one hand.

Step two, grip the knife.

And then step three is gonna be like, move your arm up and then move your arm down.

Move it up, go to the side, drop it down again.

So that's sort of a simplification, but it's highlighting how it's representing

It's saying what should be done, and it's giving separable instructions like a recipe.

And so it's kind of a knowledge-driven pseudocode or recipe for getting a motor behavior done.

Okay, first you're going to just do this, then you're going to do that.

And they basically, again, highlight and cite suggesting that most accounts of...

motor representation have in common that they're representations of knowledge that get translated in a way into motor action.

So that's the instructionism.

Any thoughts on the knife slide?


SPEAKER_00:
So, you know, having watched a chef do this, like when I used to work in restaurants and then like trying to teach my children, like my daughter's nine, right?

Like it is horrifying.

I'm like, you are going to cut your finger off, but like you watch a chef and they can do it.

They can be talking to you.

And, you know, I mean like doing 10 other things and chop, chop, chop, like not even looking or paying attention, just driving by, by sheer kinesthetic memory.

And then my daughter's like, girl, it's really scary.

Right.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

But if the instructions were too strong, then the individual would never learn how to chop without the direct oversight.

So it's sort of a, yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
One thing could, does this not demonstrate clearly that knowledge and information are not the same thing?


SPEAKER_02:
What do you mean by that?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I mean, both are portable, but do we assume that they're the same thing when, in fact, what knowledge is is it demarcates how much mental time travel we can span as opposed to information, which can fill up volumes, right?

But it's not the same thing.

One is literally that we open the lid on the brain and we pour this stuff in.

But when we...

when we unpack that, it doesn't come out the way that it went in.

It comes out, the knowledge comes out as something that we can relate in terms of time spans.

That's why we've had a lot of these conversations and a lot of these

A lot of these live streams that I participated in there, a lot of people now are coming back to, so what role does the hippocampus play?

Is it a spatial thing or can we segregate that out from time or are these time cells as opposed to space cells?

I don't, I'm not going to go much further on this, but I believe that this slide shows once and for all that we should stop thinking of information as knowledge.


SPEAKER_00:
So I've thought a lot about this, Dean, about the relationship between information, data, knowledge, and wisdom.

And I've thought about this in big groups and come to touch on some tentative definitions.

Data is information that's useful in some way.

And then knowledge is the...

the application of the data or the interpretation of the data.

And then like where wisdom is kind of knowing how to apply the knowledge, right?

So it's kind of like a succession of, from, you know, information to wisdom.

I look at it in like a hierarchical model.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you see how people that are having difficulty, maybe they're addressing issues with dementia or Alzheimer's, and when their ability to mentally time travel collapses, so does their knowledge?


SPEAKER_02:
Very interesting.


SPEAKER_01:
at least not from a working memory and fluid ability to integrate and interpret in those things.

Again, I don't want to go off into the weeds, so I'm not going to do that.

But I think one of the biggest problems that

this paper is pointing out is if you believe that information and knowledge are the same thing, you might want to go to a place that says command and control is what's actually happening.

My suggestion is this blows that up right here, right now.

Now, maybe I'm wrong, but I don't think I am.


SPEAKER_00:
So interestingly, Dean, I don't know if you know this or not, but Alzheimer's and dementia patients, like while they won't even remember the names of their children, they do remember the lyrics to songs, right?

And like they remember music in a way that is very different.

So perhaps when you get to the level of,

you know, skilled performance.

And I know like the active inference is going to kind of squish all motor in a minute.

We're going to squish it all together.

But when you think about skilled performance, perhaps that knowledge is integrated in a deeper way, right?

Like you might be able to give, to get an Alzheimer's patient, if they were physically capable to ride a bicycle, like they still retain that knowledge without having to do some kind of command.

So there's maybe like some chain in the link is broken there.

It's interesting to think about.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I mean, I've got firsthand experience because I've got family that are addressing this.

And yeah, so I know exactly what you're saying.

And again, I don't want to carry this off too far, but I think it's worth contemplating what knowledge is relative to what information is.

That's all.


SPEAKER_02:
awesome points and for moving bodies bodies in motion space and time are going to be deeply intertwined you're always somewhere some when but we have the clock and we have the gps and so it makes it seem like you could separate those out but not for the body not for the embodied agent

So there's a few types of instructionism that they then flesh out.

So that was the big category.

It's about instructions.

And they distinguish two kinds of instructionism, the strong form and the weak form.

The strong form is the claim that neural representations, so specific like firing patterns and neurons and things like that,

completely specify on their own the specific movements to be executed so if like you were recording from the brain you could just template out a specific firing sequence or a specific pattern and then that would be like the contract bicep now signal and the weaker form of instructionism is a more modest claim

that among the many dynamically coupled systems that generate skillful performance, so the neurons in the bicep and everything in between and different regions in the brain, so all those dynamically coupled systems,

there is a special kind.

Maybe you didn't capture it.

Maybe you don't know what it is, but there ought to be a special kind.

And those are the structures internal to an agent that are responsible for encoding information or instructions that are relevant for action, given the background of everything else that is enabling that role.

So in this modest account, motor representations play the role in the generation of behavior

analogous to genes in the generation of phenotypic traits so the strong form is like um would be like as strong as saying that the protein was hiding inside of the gene and then a dna gene and then it just popped out whereas the weaker form is saying there's a lot of dynamically coupled systems and

um this weak instruction is something that's distributed maybe even among them but that's the part of the dynamics of the system that are relevant for action so strong and weak and it turns out that they're going to um have something to say about both them so let's go to is that good anything to add on that one yeah

So here, they're gonna highlight the weak instructionist claim, but as you can see from the bottom of the slide, they're gonna argue that neither kind of instructionism is warranted.

So whether you take a strong or a weak approach,

they say that you're still making the same type of error, although maybe you're making it more egregiously or not.

The weak instructionist framework for motor representation says that skillful performance is the result of an orchestrated process, spanning components in the brain, body, and world,

But some of these components, especially those in the brain, play specific explanatorily irreducible roles of encoding explicit instructions for motor performance.

So that is the instructionist mindset.

And for those of you inside or outside of the Active Inference game,

is that your implicit understanding of like what is happening would you say that there is something like an instruction for pick up the finger or is there something like i should be pedaling in the brain because that's the exact kind of notion that they're going to be seeking to challenge so that's what's on the table is any idea no matter how strong or weak that instructions

can be something that is distributed throughout the system are useful for skillful performance, that's what they're going to be critiquing.

Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just really wanted to kind of loop back to the gene versus protein.

So a DNA gene gets transcribed into mRNA and then translated into protein.

But you can still have environmental modifications on that DNA gene, which I think that's kind of a neat thing.

way to kind of think about it.

You can have methylation, epigenetic modifications, or you can also have suppression of the gene by rolling it up in the chromatin.

So many different environmental factors can still map onto that DNA gene to modify it so that the instructions are somehow different.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

So let's go from instructionism of any kind to representation.

So if there is some sort of instruction in any part of the system, whether it's in one neuron or a set of neurons, or it's between neurons and glia and all kinds of cells, if there is some kind of representation, what is that representation?

So here's a quote from the paper with the red box.

They wrote, what does it mean for a thing to explicitly represent some state of affairs?

It is common in the philosophy of mind to argue that representations involve modes of presentation.

It's right there, re-presentation.

And that sort of made me curious about following to this Frege, not sure if that's the pronunciation, 1892 citation, Sense and Reference.

And there's a few pieces that were kind of interesting about this 1892 paper.

so one thing is that it's written the question of truth would cause us to abandon aesthetic delight for an attitude of scientific investigation so that's maybe even like the spirit of what we do here we try to be clear when we're talking about what we want to be clear about but we always want to leave the door and the window and the roof open for aesthetics and for art and for that kind of delight

Hence, it's a matter of indifference to us whether the name Odysseus, for instance, has a referent, so long as we accept the poem as a work of art.

It's the striving for truth that drives us always to advance from the sense to the referent.

And that is what is known as the semiotic triad, which is the relationship between the symbol, which is like

Maybe Dean, actually, what would you say about the semiotic triad?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, it's back to Piercy and stuff, Charles Sanders Pierce.

What I think is really interesting, again, is that you can have a content policy, so you can have information in representative form, but knowledge is actually a change policy.

It's the advance from knowledge.

sense to referent.

So you don't want to mix the two things up.

One is content.

The other is change.

And if you want to say that apples are oranges, you can have that.

I'm not saying that our minds aren't capable of doing that, but you can't impose it.

And that's what I think that maybe I look like a guy from the 1890s because I just have a lot of respect for everything that they talked about 100 years ago.

But yeah, I mean, it's right there.

You don't want to fly, you don't want to crash your airplane into that mountain, is my point.


SPEAKER_02:
Mount Sense.

And then also that note six right after art is, it'd be desirable to have a special term for signs having only sense.

Hmm, what would it mean to have sense like it compiles in a sensical way, but it doesn't have reference?

If we named them say representations, the words of the actors on stage would be representations.

Indeed, the actor himself would be representation.

Well, what if all the world's a stage and then who's not representing?

So these are some really cool ideas about what is being communicated

symbolically, when we use symbols like language.

So representation is a big topic.

And we talked about the representation wars and about representation and active inference beyond internalism and externalism.

It's a topic we're going to probably be coming back to forever because it's such a rich area.

Let's go back to motor representations, though.

So that's what a representation was sort of broadly, but bringing it back to the body to the motor behavior.

They cite a 2017 paper that provides a definition of motor representations.

This account is basically coming from a combination of pragmatism, practical representations, as well as computational neuroscience research.

And they highlight three key attributes in this modern research on motor representation.

The first is that those motor representations

represent objects and situation in terms of their properties relevant for action.

So like a great example is like a cup, it has a handle and like your brain will do a different thing when somebody grabs it from the top or when somebody grabs it with a,

weird way of grabbing it.

So we see objects for actions.

We see things to sit on and things to grab.

We don't just see the pixels or anything like that.

A second key aspect of motor representation is that they're informed by or contain implicitly some knowledge about the body's biomechanical and kinematic constraints.

So you'll see something for gripping that's like grippable.

You won't see like a 10 foot pipe as being something you could grip, but then as it shrinks, given the implicit or explicit knowledge of what the body can do, it becomes something that's grippable.

And then third, they say that motor representations, at least usually, serve the execution of transient movements.

So in that knife cutting example, there's a motor representation for like

contract up and bring start to bring the arm up but it doesn't need to be the representation of like the entire story arc it just has to be a transient executable um motor action so that's again motor representation it's within this instructionism frame and then dean you had a really interesting comment down here


SPEAKER_01:
Well, all I wanted to point out was that, so the active inference allows us to, well, what they're going to talk about, what we're going to get to is the generative model can be inverted.

But essentially, there's top-down and there's bottom-up, and I think that's what needs to be included.

But in the last sentence of that little comment,

world to mind and mind to world, that ability to sort of go bottom up and top down, assumes a capacity to differentiate what actually contains.

And then what is contained in a practical sense beyond a thought experiment.

We can all do thought experiments.

We can all reflect and analyze prior to and post.

But when you're in that otherwise, when you're actually carrying it out,

you're sort of going beyond that thought experiment so how do we how do we address that when we're doing our motor representing is what i basically wanted and that's just from the paper yeah basically pavisi's decomposition cool we're having so much fun but we are going to i think try to get through the rest of the slides


SPEAKER_02:
Here's one way that motor representations are used just in the literature.

They use fMRI.

They find a pattern that correlates with a certain motor behavior, and that is discussed as being the motor representation.

So that's how scientists are using the term.

We can think about motor representations as being motor commands.

So I think, Blue, did you make this one and want to add something here?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, sure.

So this motor command I thought was interesting because it's like you have to have the forward and the reverse in this motor command.

So you have to already know the outcome that you, like you have to envision the outcome in that said environment and then work backwards from there.

So I'll just read this part in blue.

It says that this entails an inverse inference problem

which requires working back from the desired sensory consequences, e.g.

desired visual and proprio-receptive sensory feedback, to a specification of their motor cause in an intrinsic frame of reference, i.e.

a set of muscle activations that can generate such desired consequences.

So I just thought that that was an interesting way to think about it.

And I always love the picture of the motor representation, the literal motor representation on the cerebellum.

And so it just shows, or maybe this is cortex.

So this is literally how it maps to the sensory cortex, which part of your piece of your brain literally maps to each piece of your body.

It's interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
And it reminds me of coaching cues like lift, lift, lift, or push, something like that.

You say what you want to see happen, lift the bar or something like that.

You don't have to say every single cue.

So that's sort of a semantic way of engaging with what's happening across the brain and across the body.

And to bring the motor to action before we go to active inference, they talk about action oriented representations as being the motor representations that are for action.

So anything on this blue?

Yeah, but it's another example.

Like breathe in, pretend you're smelling a flower.

Which one conveys more of a story?

And that reminds me actually of Dave Snowden's address not so long ago, where instead of just asking someone, you know, tell me a story about San Francisco.

You'd say, a friend only has two minutes and they want to know the single thing that's most exciting to visit when they go.

That's a very rich setup for somebody to tell a story in.

And so it relates to giving suggestive cues that are richer than just contract your bicep, but you could give a cue, you know, bend it like Beckham or something like that.

You can make a metaphor or you can allude to something that actually invokes more activation.

You know, it'd be interesting.

Can people deadlift more if you say, all right, lift up the car.

You know, somebody's underneath it.

Go for it.

Or, you know, you're going to win this competition if you do this.

Those are like very action-oriented motivators.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, actually, I put this in here, this slide, because I did a lot of coaching in my life, probably 30 years of it.

And I think one of the things that I found as an effective coach is you want to think of it as any puzzle pieces missing.

Back to that, I don't want to go back up to the slide where the guy was balancing on the edge of the building.

But again, as a coach,

There'll be things that the person who's performing that motor skill will be thinking about.

And what an effective coach tends to do is try to bring into

into the realm of what they are focusing on without interfering with that, without adding a bunch of cognitive issues that again, get in the way of doing, making it an overthinking thing.

If you can breathe, if you can remind a person to breathe out or exhale just before they do something,

They would do that autonomically.

But if you can actually get them to think about that, that again, that's a mind calming exercise.

That's actually a pretty effective coaching tool.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

And I think we're going to come back to that with instruction versus interaction.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.


SPEAKER_02:
Then we turn to active inference.

Yay.

And they have box one in their paper at the very end where they define active inference.

Was it a reviewer?

Did they want to clarify?

We'll find out soon.

And they basically write that a system can be described to engage in active inference in the sense of performing belief updating and acting such as to fulfill prior preferences about observations.

Because in active inference, there's kind of two things that the system can do.

It can act or it can infer.

It can update its action states.

It can update its internal generative model of the world.

Those are sort of the two levers that it has to play with because it can't directly control the observations.

But those two levers, action and inference, are being played with in service of reducing uncertainty about observations.

So that's some of the key attributes of active inference.

And they suggest that active inference provides a mechanism to derive the dynamics of sensory and active states, which are these two blanket states on this image, such that they minimize a variational free energy functional.

So we're not going to go into that now, but there's basically an equation, a formalism that trades off model complexity, how many parameters it has with model accuracy.

So real systems are sort of on this razor's edge where they want to have well-fitting but simple models.

And then the tuning between, you know, great tasting and less filling, the tuning between fewer parameters and better fit, that is where active inference agents are surfing.

Anything on active inference or let's just see how it gets used.

So the paper draws extensively on Fristin 2011, the figures and a lot of the citations.

So it's worthwhile to actually go to that Fristin 2011 paper if you're curious about a deeper level.

And here from the skillful performance paper, they basically, oh, this is actually, sorry.

This is from Fristin 2011.

Despite the compelling simplicity of the optimal control approach,

He's saying that it's wrong for two reasons.

The first is that basing on the ideas from information flow, he's going to suggest that motion cannot be specified by a single value function.

There might be many different ways to achieve a goal.

So it might be hard to rank or even compare totally different ways of achieving that goal on a value only framework.

And then secondly, optimal control theory assumes that movement is caused or determined by value.

Like motors, motor actions are valued differentially and then ones that are more valuable are undertaken.

However, value is an attribute of the states that are caused by movement.

It's a consequence, not a cause.

This means that the real problem is to understand the acquisition and realization of beliefs that cause movement.

In other words, to understand motor control in terms of inference and belief.

And then another really interesting piece was to describe optimal control even way back when in 2011 as active inference with three simplifications.

So the first simplification is saying you got to combine action inference together.

You could simplify and consider only action or consider only perception, but optimal control is not dealing with those two in a way as integrated as active inference.

The second simplification has to do with the delays in the signals.

So that's a little bit of a motor specific, more neural perspective on motor control.

And then the third piece, which is perhaps the most salient is to realize that value alone and cost functions

doesn't get you all the way to embodied action, but embodied action is more consistent with thinking about how organisms have prior beliefs about what kind of motor behaviors are likely for them.

And that is a broader framework than just value.

So that's first in 2011, but there's of course a whole paper there.

So if you're curious, you should check it out.

Okay, figure one.

Wanna take a first pass on this one?


SPEAKER_00:
Sure, I'll read it.

So just like we had talked about earlier, you have the extrinsic frame of reference, like what needs to be done in this environment, right?

So the motor plant is the physical motor system, like a limb, that executes the task to be performed.

And that's the plant kinetics equation here.

And then physical movements of the motor plant in turn generate sensory information.

This information is conveyed to a state estimator via a sensory mapping.

So that's the sensory mapping process, the next equation, and then there's the state estimator in the middle.

And over on the right, the forward model, it says the function of the forward model is to improve the execution of action by helping to finesse the inferences of the state estimator.

And you can see that there's a feedback with the state estimator, both forward and backwards.

And then the efference copy says the optimal controller.

Oh, yeah, that's this next part down here at the bottom.

The optimal controller maps desired trajectories specified in extrinsic coordinates to muscle movements, i.e.

to changes in muscular states specified in terms of intrinsic coordinates.

And then that goes back, loops back to the plant kinetics.


SPEAKER_02:
Yep.

So this is the whole forward model in motor control.

So this is basically the optimal motor control theory framing of what is happening in the brain.

Starts with a control implication like control theory or cybernetics.

Motor behavior occurs in the plants, the motor plants, the...

the infer plant, but not here.

And then that gets mapped through sense to a state estimator, where is my hand?

And then that is going to get in feedback with a forward model that then says, oh, your hand is too gripped.

It needs to relax.

And then that feeds back to the optimal control equation.

So whether these actually are instantiated in modules of the brain, that's like the super strong take.

The weaker take would be, or the instrumental take would be that we could model as if it were this way.

Now they're going to bring together the motor representations and this optimal motor control theory way of forward and reverse modeling.

So this is an intrinsic to extrinsic mapping.

Intrinsic is the motor commands.

They're representations internal to the system.

And the forward model goes from motor command to bodily motion.

So that's like the instruction is like, relax the hand.

Okay.

And then it gets implemented.

But interestingly, just thinking relax your hand semantically or syntactically, it doesn't open your hand, right?

Or, you know, play Beethoven.

Doesn't work quite like that.

So the instructions are not just what we hear in our inner voice, but that is the forward model.

And then the inverse model would be the mapping from bodily motions back to the commands.

and to now connect it to their citation of the Wheeler and Clark 99, it's like the DNA genes, it's a story for another day why the gene concept is a little bit more nuanced than just that.

But again, that's another day.

The DNA genes are like intrinsic and forward genetics,

is the study of how changes in dna influence phenotype and reverse genetics is going from an interesting phenotype and then asking what were the genetic changes that caused it so it actually helped me as a geneticist to understand what was happening here by thinking about forward and reverse genetics and then thinking okay so then the kinds of arguments that people make about how genes

go to protein are like the arguments that people go from motor representations to motor behavior, i.e.

that the information is in the genes.

It's in our DNA.

I mean, you see that on billboards on the freeway.

It's in our company's DNA.

It's in our motor representation, the motor behavior, or is it?

So they talk about forward and reverse model or inverse models.

And that's again, like kind of like forward and reverse genetics.

Any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_00:
I was just thinking about self-driving cars and like, where's that like motor representation.


SPEAKER_02:
And then Dean, you wrote a really nice point in the comments.


SPEAKER_01:
I just, I honestly, why should I feel bad for OMCT?

But I did because it was at this point I was like, man, and all the people that are sort of really invested in this, they're like, they're vested in this.

This is how it works.

And again, it was kind of like, okay, if you want a set of commands, like I understand a bunch of people that program and they do that sort of thing.

And so it's an easy transference to say that a content policy is also a change policy.

But how do you write out a change policy?


SPEAKER_02:
yep and i think this is just as you highlighted it in the notes there it says um the omct is inverting the forward model so they're literally looking for an inversion from the bodily back to the motor this is contrasted with active inference which replaces the inverse forward model pair

with a generative model that expands on the forward model to harness probabilistic beliefs about the expected sensory causes of action.

So rather than using a separate inverse model to infer what is appropriate action, you have basically just a generative model that's integrating that feedback loop.

Do you have?

yes so um this is uh an idea that i think we've heard steven talk about too the sandwich model the classical sandwich it's actually called the classical sandwich of cognition so this is kind of a classical sandwich for me that looked tasty um one of the every every stream with dean you gotta have like a sandwich or a hamburger


SPEAKER_01:
Senti Burger.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Yeah.

This is a quasi sandwich.

A major assumption in OMCT is the often implicit reliance on a sequential and modular architecture of perception, cognition, and action, which is the sense, model, plan, act, or the OODA, observed, orient, decide, act paradigm, or the classical sandwich.

So it kind of like sees these epochs of action where first a new stimuli comes in, that's observe, and then that gets integrated with cognition.

orient and decide in the OODA loop or in the cognitive framing about modeling and planning.

And then that gets translated into action.

Seems fair.

That is the sense, think, act cycle.

And that's the classical sandwich.

So I don't know what food active inference would be, but it's not going to be a classical sandwich.

Okay, maybe we'll leave that as an open thought question.

If active inference were a food or a style of food, what might it be?

Okay, and then...

That takes us, again, they're just, these are like, they're sort of like two teams.

We have instructionism, motor representation, OMCT, sense plan act, classical sandwich.

That's not active inference.

Active inference is going to be in contrast to all of them and hopefully getting some of the limitations resolved.

Do you have anything to say about this?

Okay, in this section, less control, more action, they're gonna actually move.

We spent most of this video highlighting what that integrated set of ideas was.

The non-active inference ideas about how all those topics were related.

And they basically here are going to highlight how OMCT does have an instructionist assumption.

and how that relies on separable forward and inverse models rather than an integrated generative model, and how that relates to motor commands rather than something else.

So finally, we get to

active inference and how motor control is going to occur.

And we'll juxtapose these two figures in a second, but this is again, a similar drawing.

In fact, it might even make sense just to show figure one and figure two side by side, because at first I looked at them, I thought it's the same brain and I'm kind of seeing the same like shapes on it.

But we can go to 30 and look at the two differences.

So it's color coded.

Left is the figure 1 OMCT.

Figure 2 is on the right with the active inference framing.

So we can see that plant kinetics and sensory mappings in red are found on both sides.

also see that there's a forward model on both sides and that there is an optimal control element in blue on both sides but it's that state estimator at the nexus between the sensory mapping and the forward model and the optimal control there's the rub something is rotten in the state estimate of omct

That's what Hamlet would have said, because there's something about estimating the state, like that's where my hand is that isn't happening in active inference.

And that's really this key and interesting piece is that you can even look at the way that the models are connected to see that there's kind of like this fundamental loop between the generative model, forward model in active inference,

and sense and action getting spun off of that loop.

Act, infer, act, infer.

That's active inference.

And here it's like perceive, estimate, state, reverse engineer, value-driven assessment of optimal control.

That's a quite different layout for cognition.

This is the one that's consistent with a sense, think, act loop.

because in that think as a separable module you get state estimators how else would you translate from the perception to the action well in active inference we kind of have an answer for that at least we have a model framework that helps us get at it anything to add on the figure or we'll continue to how it challenges okay great so how does active inference challenge omct either of you want to say something on this one


SPEAKER_00:
So since I made this slide, I liked this comparison and these two like sentences really kind of stuck out for me.

So in the OMCT, which is linear quadratic Gaussian control, that's this LQG model that I'm going to mention.

So it says, this means that the canonical controls generated by the LQG models cannot reduce or even increase a system's uncertainty in the future, i.e.

actions can only be instrumental and have no epistemic effect on future state estimates.

So I thought that that's kind of really nailing at what's the fundamental thing that OMCT doesn't do that active inference is going to allow for.

So it says with active inference, the core idea then is rather than select an explicit motor command, the organism infers what it must be doing under the assumption that what it does must minimize prediction error.

So there is that room to reduce uncertainty in the active inference model.

I just thought that was an important distinction.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean, anything on that?


SPEAKER_01:
No, I think Blue, thanks for throwing that in there because I think one of the things that we have to sort of address is do all actions follow commands?

I think the act of inference says, no, we can act first.

as opposed to always following some sort of a prompt.

And I think this slide really spells that out clearly.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

And this piece right here is about how actions can only be instrumental and have no epistemic effect.

So you need a total bolted on second layer in a value-driven and value-evaluated model of motor behavior.

You need a second layer to explain play,

to explain exploratory behavior, curiosity, and just like sort of not caring that much.

Whereas an active inference, those are natural attributes of our fundamental model.

Okay.


SPEAKER_01:
I think the OMCT naturally constrains us.

If you're in the business of learning, it would be great because then everybody would have to follow.

There would be no other option but to follow.

But I think what active inference does is it takes the lid off that and says, no, I can model first.

If there's nothing to follow, I'm not stuck.


SPEAKER_02:
That reminds me almost of like the teacher is the person who could get 100% on the test.

So I'm up here on the top of the mountain.

Come on.

75 is okay.

76 is better.

Come on.

One by one.

Let's go over the questions you got wrong so that you can get them right.

Where does that come into play visually?

So, sorry for the slightly busy slide.

Earlier versions were even busier.

Active inference framework comprehensively challenges the optimal control theoretic approach to sensory motor behavior.

In particular, the idea in traditional OMCT is that behavior can only, basically you can evaluate the performance of different behaviors with a single number, a scalar that is defined and tracked by a value function.

So this is sort of a traditional hill climber approach.

Like if you want to get to the top of the mountain, then the higher up the mountain you are, the better it is, the more value of that state.

so here's an agent on landscape and it's going to kind of take a ruler and then it's going to look at where it is locally and then it's going to follow uphill it's like a greedy value pursuing agent

Whereas an active inference, it actually draws on thermodynamics and information flows, as suggested earlier, to take the total current, the total flow, and separate it into two components.

One of those is value.

So you still do get exactly a separable component from the total flow that represents that ruler going uphill.

But there's also a

vector that is like resting on that ruler but going at a flat it's an iso contour it's kind of like when you look at a topo map for going hiking and that is what

Yep, that's the physics of flow embedded in active inference show that motion in a biologically realistic state irreducibly includes two orthogonal kinds of motion.

So those two rulers, again, one is going on whatever the angle is of the hill and the other one is going on the flat part.

Those are going to be always like orthogonal to each other, like at a 90 degree cross.

So there's an irrotational curl-free component.

That's which movement will take me just locally up the hill.

And then there's a solenoidal or divergence-free component that circulates you on the same elevation.

The curl-free component allows the flow to climb a gradient towards more valuable or probable states.

The solenoidal component specifies a flow around an isoprobability contour where all entered states have an equal value or probability.

So there is an isocontour for this agent on the left, but it's not calculating or tracking it.

in active inference we could turn the knob so that it just pursues value but we also have a framework for that sort of play and who on the rugged landscape is going to get to the top of the hill an agent that's able to switch back and forth or you know shade between these different ways of working it's like you climb up and then you're at the top of a local peak and then can you circulate a little bit

So that is part of how information theory and information flows play in active inference.

Let's take information flow from a sort of quantitative ontology of information flow like first in 2011 and in this figure to this version of a flow state.

So I'm gonna play this video on repeat blue while you describe what you're excited about here.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, so just upon reading the title of the paper, skilled performance, I was like, oh, active inference.

We're going to talk about the flow state.

And I was like, we got to flows, but I kind of was left wanting to talk about the flow state.

And so this is the preview from the Disney movie, Soul, where everybody has their thing, and they can jump into a flow state.

And it's just showing funny parts from the movie for people who have seen it or not.

It's very cute.

But in that flow state, which I think we've all kind of experienced, it is like the skilled performance where Daniel and I were discussing earlier, like you can just do things without thinking about them.

And so I was reminded of the paper that we did

toward a predictive global neuronal workspace by Chris White and Ryan Smith and that was stream 18.0.1 and .2 if anybody wants to check it out but they're there they mapped they built a model of the visual consciousness right and so we talked a little bit about consciousness and specifically phenomenological consciousness like where you're able to report like I am

Saw a red bird or whatever like you can say I saw a red bird and we talked about in that video how the model didn't apply for or it like for Inattentional blindness, right?

It couldn't it couldn't account for when you see something but you can't report that you saw it, right?

So you have to have this this phenomenological consequence or consciousness.

And so I was thinking about the flow state and

And really, like, is there, like, a motor consciousness?

Like, right?

Like, so, you know, I'm conscious that my feet are on the floor.

And, like, this is something for people who meditate.

Like, a lot of it is, like, awareness of the body and where the body is in space.

And so it's sometimes you can use proprioception there.

But am I conscious of where my body is, where I want to put my body?

Or can I just...

do it like is it like inattentional blindness like when you're in that flow state like when you're dancing you know like you don't you can't report like oh i did a pirouette and then you know or whatever like you can't you can't verbally report what's happening with your motor consciousness in a lot of times especially when you're in that like flow state so is that like similar maybe to inattentional blindness anyway it's just something that i was thinking about um

And I think that there's an interesting contrast between the way that this paper models the motor active inference versus the visual active inference that was modeled in that paper.


SPEAKER_02:
And it almost reminds me of like a sports, you know, or like a track meet.

And sometimes the reporter, okay, how does that feel?

You just won the game.

It's like,

The athlete, it just, their body says it all or the performance says it all.

And it's like, and then what?

And it's like, as if they were running alongside trying to get the play-by-play from the person who's actually in the action, they're not going to be able to report it in the same way.

It breaks them out of the flow state to have to verbally represent it.

which is why in sports commentary, sometimes you have like a conversation happening between like the more maybe pragmatic or descriptive representation and then a more like color commentary, because that plays both roles of giving the information about what is happening, but also some of that excitement and connecting the dots.

But the person you can't ask in the moment is the one who's actually doing the action.

So that's cool.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Oftentimes wondered if after one of these performances, the reporter got the response, well, here's my physiological state.

I think that would be awesome.

Well, right now I'm just feeling like my right knee is, I can't move it anymore.

And then they just dropped the mic and walked away, right?

There's my tooth drop.


SPEAKER_02:
nice maybe in the future they'll be wearing you know physiological sensors and that'll say it all right so what does active inference sort of in closing here what is being added or contributed by active inference well it's a formal model of motor control it helps us understand online

no, not like this live stream, like real time, motor adaptation to an environment, and thinks about that environment in terms of a, not necessarily symmetric, but bidirectional relationship between agent and environment, and

um brunberg and constant and many other papers have explored this interface and that's been just the tip of the iceberg of the richness in terms of thinking bi-directionally like in the value-driven motor control they didn't even mention the environment they didn't mention generative models of the niche or having a second person who you're playing with or an adversary or a collaborator it was very much internal and value-driven and

active inference blows the lid open to play and collaboration and a niche that's rich with rich models of it and the tight and reciprocal relationship between action and perception in active inference resonates with other key ideas related to embodied inactive embedded and cultured extended eee

approaches to cognition and agency.

Any adjective.

We like all the letters, but there's a whole area of sort of critiques that swirled and eventually coalesced that critiqued a sort of narrow computationalist framing of cognition.

And active inference is almost bringing these threads back together by helping us have computational models that respect the richness and the embodiment in the world.

but we're only steps down that pathway in terms of where it can go and in the end where the authors take us is towards a focus on interactions not instructions

and say that the interactionist account portrays skill as enacted without needing to assume it's driven by instructions that are implicitly couched in terms of the content of what is being represented.

You can't say pick up the arm so the knife is higher without having a state estimate of where the arm is and where the knife is.

And their alternative interactionist account for skilled performance

achieves this um resolution this improvement by avoiding two sets of commitments so for those who are commitment phobic active inference is great for you um it doesn't assume that generative models used in active inference are the models that are used by the organisms or systems themselves this is kind of the instrumental way of thinking we don't need to say that's what

the organism is doing we don't need to have a debate whether birds know where their wings are or what they think about what it's like to be a bird we can just have a framing that helps us understand how they act in the world and also the second commitment avoided by active inference is

and more importantly for their discussions about representation and instructions, they do not assume that the explanatory story that's offered by sensory motor accounts needs to posit any causally efficacious mediating knowledge.

So you don't need to propose that there's some sort of kernel of knowledge that then gets enacted through a command

you have an account that just sidesteps that.

It doesn't say it doesn't exist.

It's just, there's another way of framing what is happening.

So I'll go to this closing slide and we can actually provide our last thoughts.

So what would a good understanding enable here?

We actually, we didn't have the,

big questions and why it matters slide here, because we kind of went through and through, but what would a good understanding enable?

And this is an open question for those listening and also for the authors, why does it matter?

What would we be enabling ourselves to do if we had a better way or a different way of thinking about skill performance?

Can everybody play classical music or is there going to be some other implication?

What are the unique predictions and implications?

So for those who say, hey, I don't think OMCT is knocked out yet.

What is the differentiator?

What's the experiment or the test that we can actually do to see where active inference is coming into play?

What are the next steps for us as a research community?

And what are the goals of skilled performance research?

And of course, what are you still curious about?

So any closing thoughts here?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I'll just give one.

I want to thank both of you guys for keeping this grounded because so many times I could have blown off on this.

But one of the things I do want to, I'm going to want to ask the authors about is, I do think that there is a place for instruction, but it's a tiny...

It's a fragment of the total memory sphere and it's to do with perspective memory, where if I don't remember to bring the milk home when I'm driving home from work, I am going to get in trouble because I forgot to carry out a side action.

in the continuum of I have to come home from work today, but I can't forget to bring a quart of milk home with me.

So I do think that there is a part for this, this instructionist piece in the memory scape, but I don't think it should be the total picture.

So I'm going to want to ask the authors about that.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect.

And that's a theme that we've seen come up, which is like, just because active inference is awesome doesn't mean it's our only tool in the toolbox.

So like even earlier today, we were hearing about how active inference models can then be used as input into a just totally different kind of model to draw on the strengths of both.

So it could be possible that

There's things that are described well by active inference.

And then there's a wrapper that is almost instructionist.

So like people could give instructions, pick up your hand and then the person does it.

So was that not an instruction?

I mean, what does instruction mean if that's not an instruction?

So how do we combine active inference models with other kinds of models?

Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, that's a great question too.

And I also think about, I don't know, really like where...

where like the model fits in and, and really just like what I was thinking, what I was talking about earlier about like phenomenological consciousness.

Like if I intend to do something, is that like, do intentions matter to beliefs and desires and intentions like matter?

Um, sometimes, but like also like if, you know, a tennis ball is flying at my face and I reach my hand up and catch it like without thinking, um,

like that's like a very like i just a perception action a perception action like just happened all at the same time right so is there space for for the thought um about the action or is it always i don't know i'm still squishy like where does that where does thinking about doing something fit into the active inference loop because sometimes you think about it and sometimes you don't


SPEAKER_02:
Sometimes you rehearse, you think about it, think about it, and then you choke or you don't.

Other times there's like, I mean, famously captured by viral videos since the beginning of time.

Somebody does like an incredibly amazing maneuver that they certainly didn't plan and they didn't have knowledge of, and they probably could never do it twice.

It's awesome to have a framework that covers potentially our autonomic reflexes all the way up perhaps to culturally infused and trained performance and enables us to think about how pre-play and replay of motor actions come into effect, but also those America's home videos moments where something amazing just happens or something in sports where something amazing happens.

And you look at the replay, it's like, what?


SPEAKER_01:
how did that happen and the answer is they didn't know it was going to happen so right there it couldn't have been knowledge driven can i add one last thing daniel for at least for me yeah again thanks blue for for putting in the uh the little clip about flow there because

I would like to find out if somebody actually identifies by the sequence of commands that they carried out, like if I carried out a set of instructions, would I identify myself now as the carrier out of those commands?

Or is my identity more about those aspects of how I sort of move through commands

through time and change along with it.

Because if it is, I guess if I could see myself as being identified by the instructions I carried out, then I guess optimal motor control theory would be the whole thing.

But until somebody shows me that that's actually how I identify, I think we have to sort of take it off that deflated sense and inflate it up to the identity piece and see the interstate for what it is.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll close with a Borges quote inspired by Dean.

Time is the substance I am made of.

Time is a river which sweeps me along, but I am the river.

It is a tiger which destroys me, but I am the tiger.

It is a fire which consumes me, but I am the fire.


SPEAKER_01:
There you go.

Perfect.


SPEAKER_02:
Thank you everybody for watching.

We hope to see you participating soon.

## PgzQrHSu1CU

SPEAKER_01:
Greetings.

Hello, everyone.

Thank you for joining live or in replay.

Today, it is May 27th.

Is that true?

Not even close.

Not even close.

It's June 8th.

It's June 8th, 2021.

We're here in Act-Inf Lab Livestream 23.1, and we are discussing the paper, Embodied Skillful Performance, where the action is.

So welcome everyone to Active Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links that are here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream with all of the advantages and constraints that that provides.

Please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And we'll be trying to follow good etiquette for live streams.

From this short link, you can access the calendar of events for live streams of multiple different kinds.

And highlighted there with the blue arrows are today's discussion on June 8th and next week's discussion that'll be on the 15th.

And they're both gonna be on this paper, embodied skillful performance.

So we had a good time making the dot zero and learning about this and kind of opening up

what this was adjacent to and now we'll look forward to continuing the discussion and just seeing where it goes for those who are watching live it would be i guess especially appreciated to throw us some questions whether they're related to the paper or not

The goal for today is to discuss and learn.

The paper is Embodied Skillful Performance, where the action is by Hippolyto, Baltieri, Friston, and Ramsted from 2021.

And today in 23.1, we'll be ambling skillfully, we hope, through the paper again and

flagging areas where we wanna be talking with the authors next week.

Greetings, Dave.

Welcome.

And just seeing where we get to, opening up threads and kind of enjoying the middle part of the .012 sandwich.

So we can begin with the introductions and the warmups.

Today, there's a few of us, so we can go around in the introduction and just give a short introduction or a check-in, and we can also then pass it to somebody who hasn't spoken, taking a look at the warmup questions.

So I'm Daniel, I'm a postdoctoral researcher in California, and I'll pass to Dean.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I'm Dean.

I'm up here in Calgary.

And I'm getting more and more involved with this idea of sort of building up the active inference profile.

I'll pass it to David.

Dave is there.

But if he isn't, I'll pass it back to Daniel.


SPEAKER_01:
Dave, you're welcome to join in whenever you would like.

I hear you tapping a little bit, but maybe whenever you want to speak.

Otherwise, what is the Active Inference profile?


SPEAKER_02:
That's what I think we're trying to build out here.

I think we're trying to give that some anchors and some leverage.

So we haven't figured it out completely yet.

It's like everything in Active Inference.

It's a generative model.

It's growing.

And I don't know what its final form will be or if it takes on a final form even.


SPEAKER_01:
Are there other areas that have profiles or are there other profiles of note?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think there's convention.

That's already an established profile.

And I don't know that this has got to that place yet where we can say it has a convention or something that's predictable about it.

And I think that's what makes it kind of, well, in my mind, it makes it curious.

Where is it going as opposed to where it's been and what it's established so far?


SPEAKER_01:
nice points agreed active inference especially in these nascent times it's like a strange attractor where people come in from so many perspectives and then they get slingshot out in a different direction or with a different um memory or different view so dave no worries about the hardware mystery everyone is welcome to just type in the youtube chat if they have questions so i think for the rest of this stream

we're going to walk through again, maybe thinking again about walking as a skillful action and all the fun similarities and differences between motor actions, which are what are discussed here and that sort of space where motor and knowledge come together like with skilled action.

Yes, Dave, your different embodiments are muted indeed.

So the paper,

uh laid out their aims and claims and the central aim of the paper according to the authors is to discuss critically the limitations of instructionist control theoretic models of skillful performance so the big dichotomy or dilemma that's going to come up again and again is this difference between interactionism and instructionism so maybe dean

Where are you coming at that from or how would you describe the difference between instructionism and interactionism?


SPEAKER_02:
Well,

Well, first of all, even including interactionism as a formality, I think is a huge step.

It's metaphorically speaking, it's opening both of your eyes.

You have a second eye available, but maybe you weren't aware of it.

And now with the idea of turning that into sort of a structured or formalized approach as opposed to just...

the instructionalism piece, which is traditionally what we've formalized is it's not just a doubling of what we might be aware of.

It's actually placing ourselves where we can see the depth of what we're observing or what we're analyzing or what we're addressing.

And I think that that would be a huge step if we could get people comfortable with that.

I'm not saying that people will necessarily get comfortable with it, though.

Because for a lot of people, let's be honest, just following along and being instructed is difficult enough.

And now you're introducing a whole second lens of information.

And very quickly, you'll have a bunch of people screaming, no, you're going to overwhelm them.

You're going, well, I'm not.

Just because I have both my eyes open doesn't mean that I'm going to be... I hope it doesn't mean I'm going to be scared.

I hope it means that I'm going to feel a little bit more grounded and centered.

But we'll have a conversation about that today, especially when we include the whole body.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, the entire corpus.

One thought there, instructionism being like instructions are passed from A to B, you know, water flowing downhill.

Instructionism has a directional context and also the idea that what's being passed is the sort of packet of meaning.

Like, here's the envelope with your instructions, now carry them out.

and what i think is exciting about interactionism is it's not just a bi-directional instructionism it's not like well you instruct me and then i'll instruct you that's sort of the the low bar for interactionism but where interactionism really blows the lid off is when we open into that third space of interaction and improvisation so i think that's what's kind of

Interesting to draw out, and they are going to highlight in this paper how control theory models of skillful performance or otherwise, implicitly or explicitly, do have instructionist assumptions.

Specifically, this idea that motor representations convey or harness instructions about how to perform a specific task.

So even if the authors of those control theory papers didn't explicitly use the word instructionism, then they're still playing into this idea that instructions are being passed, for example, from the brain to the body in order to be carried out.

And we'll be looking at that from a more formal perspective in a few minutes.

And the big claim that they're going to be reaching is that Active Inference doesn't need to posit that instructionist assumption.

So there's a way to frame control and skillful performance in the Active Inference framework that doesn't take on these instructionist assumptions and the content based directional message passing that it entails.

And that'll be something fun to explore.

Also, Dave has a nice comment in chat.

Dave wrote, as I recall, Piaget and colleagues counted and described something like 400 distinct embodied concepts used by the walking skills of a typical 15 month old.

So that just shows how there's a lot going on, even with, uh,

behaviors like walking.

Cool.


SPEAKER_02:
One other thing too, the assumption that somehow the muscles and the nerve endings sending signals that are in symbolic form is quite a stretch.

I mean, we talked about that last week when we got to that inverse directionality slide.

But I thought about that a little bit after because I went back and watched

after last week, and I was just like, I know for me, I was incredulous a couple of times when we went through the paper with Blue, but even going back and looking at it, you'd have to build a really powerful argument that says that the pressure signals on my fingertips are coming back to me in verbalized form.


SPEAKER_01:
Exactly.

It's this idea that, you know, the files are on the computer, like what's coming up from the fingertips is pain and what's going down is an instruction.

That's sort of the Cartesian dualism mapped onto instructionism is just like body and brain are two disjoint pieces and they pass special symbolic information to each other.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

And we'll see how that... Then our brain and our body is having a conversation.


SPEAKER_01:
So what is it, if not a conversation, or could it be beyond a conversation?


SPEAKER_02:
Right, right.


SPEAKER_01:
Nice.

Cool.

We covered the abstract last time.

All we'll point out here is just that they start as good philosophers with an examination of the instructionism and what that entails.

The second and third sections of the paper are characterizing the representationalism that's related to these motor commands, kind of what we were just alluding to, and a special focus on the optimal motor control theory.

And then the final sections take it to predictive coding and to active inference, which are formal frameworks for modeling behavior that are related to control theory formalizations, but the goal of the paper is to show that some of the instructionism is left at home, which allows us to go out with interactionism.

Here is the roadmap framing a similar outline.

and also just giving a few more signposts along the way with the figures and the box and whatnot.

The keywords provided here were helping us understand what did the authors want to have their work indexable near.

In the semantic net of literature online, how did the authors want their work to be grounded?

And it was in skillful performance, that's in the title.

Optimal motor control, that's the sort of scapegoat or foil, that's the contrast.

Maybe even bringing us back to contrasting divergences.

Instructionism, again, tied up with the optimal motor control.

Motor representations lending us into action-oriented representations and finally taking us to active inference where we kind of begin and end.

So skillful performance can mean many pieces and the authors defined it as opposed to bear movements, such as breathing and blinking, skillful performances are intelligent bodily activities, which harness knowledge about how to perform certain movements expertly.

It reminds me of the eternal debate who slash what is intelligent if an insect knows how to walk or if it is trained to do something versus if it's something that its body provides the training for inherently.

What is skillful?

So definitely we'll want to ask the authors and anybody in the chat and anybody who joins us next week.

What is skillful performance?

What is unskillful performance?

If somebody tries to do a skillful performance and fails, is that still within this category of behavior?


SPEAKER_02:
I saved up for this week because I wanted to get to the

after the comma, the which harness knowledge.

I kind of hinted that that's, I wanted to ask a question, and I still do want to ask a question.

What does that mean, to harness knowledge?

Consciously?

Or can you get to a place, I mean, Blue talked about this, you talked about this.

Can we get to a place of doing it automatically?

Does that mean it's harnessed, just because we're not thinking about it?

And how much time did they spend looking at that piece?

Because that kind of demarcates out what skill is.

If it's a dependency on harnessing, then how do we define that?

How do we define what's captured and what isn't?


SPEAKER_01:
And the harnessing brings up kind of like harnessing or yoking a buffalo or a horse or something like that.

And that's kind of hinging on that word.

It's like the knowledge is that wild stallion.

And it's actually the bodily activities

which harness that knowledge because when you quote know that your body can move in many different ways but skillful performance is when that is harnessed it's when it's connected to an instrument or whether it's its own instrument and it's channeled in a way maybe that's productive or expressive well at a fundamental level we have to again be careful


SPEAKER_02:
that something going on at our fingertips is being harnessed by something going on three and a half feet away?

Yes, connected, but is that an assumption that's verifiable?

Is there an actual harnessing going on even?

Because lots and lots of times, things happen at my fingertips that I'm not


SPEAKER_01:
sending i'm not even aware of what my hand is doing my wife tells me stop jiggling right just because i got nervous energy or whatever i think that's going to come back also to the predictive processing and predictive coding frameworks which is sort of when the body is getting the sick the signals it expects like if you're not consciously bringing your attention to you know your foot

If it's just your foot in the shoe, it feels like nothing or there's no attention paid to it.

And you can kind of shine that light of attention on it and it will feel normal.

Or maybe you can start to zoom in on other sensations like tingling or other feelings.

But the sort of default state when you're not paying attention, things that are happening the way that you expect is normal.


SPEAKER_02:
And that's why that active inference piece is really interesting.

Because in order for it to be active inferencing, there has to be some kind of attention or awareness being paid.


SPEAKER_01:
And that's like, it's attention as a resource.

Got to pay the cost of attention or suffer the regret of not paying attention.

And Dave wrote, trying and failing, especially if part of the problem is choking, which was brought up by the authors in the paper as well, is likelier to involve more neocortical activation and more access consciousness than smooth performance of the same routine.

So trying and failing, there's a lot more inner dialogue or thought process, like awareness happening.

Whereas when something is performed skillfully and smoothly, it just sort of goes off without a hitch and just, you know, you whip out the instrument

make your shot or your swing or whatever it happens to be.

And then maybe you can narrate in retrospect, but in the moment you're not having as much awareness.

So that's something.


SPEAKER_02:
One last.


SPEAKER_01:
Oh yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
So this is really interesting to me because again, is it skillful to be in the Peloton and be, be pulled along by what we would describe as the intention of those people

front of you is that considered to be a part of this because there's a lot of things that we're aware and conscious of and some things that happen in these skill performances they're just because they're part of the collective they're they're caught up in the inertia of the moment and is how do we how do we factor that in when we're talking about active inference because I think that's what instructionalism doesn't attend to

There's many, many things that are going to get dragged along here just because they're drafting.

And how do we address that when we're talking about skill performance, skillful performance and interactionism?

Because interactionism at least says I can be caught up in an inertia moment.

I don't have to explain it.


SPEAKER_01:
absolutely um instructionism has to pitch and hole everything into that symbolic information theory what is the instruction from the front of the pack of the flock of birds or the peloton of cyclists what is the instruction that's getting passed back

And so we have to go from what we know is just happening, which is like the physical inertia.

There's also a narrative inertia.

There might even be just an air current going over the person that actually stabilizes them in their spot.

We don't need to fall back to referring to those as instructions when they're clearly interacting phenomena, different types of interactions.

You could have somebody breathing heavily next to you and that could give you a signal, but it's about the unpacking of that interaction and then where that takes the collective rather than again, just thinking about everything as connected with wires and passing secrets.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.


SPEAKER_01:
Cool.

um we can look again at the active infer plants so this was just asking where are the limits of skillful performance if the niche and the fitness to the niche is what counts for different organisms our human cultural niche has all these awesome kinds of skillful performance and otherwise but what about

other creatures?

What about other phenomena, the kinds of things that we might want to also model with active inference, but just don't quite have that same level of maybe thinking through other minds as we have with people, whereas we try to put ourselves in the shoes of somebody else?


SPEAKER_02:
Do you think, Daniel, that that plant has got an embodied technical skill?


SPEAKER_01:
Welcome, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Hey, Blue.


UNKNOWN:
Hi.


SPEAKER_01:
We're just wondering whether plants have the... This plant.

Oh, this plant.


SPEAKER_02:
This plant has a technical skill now that it has the tools to be able to move from side to side.


SPEAKER_01:
It's a great question.

I wonder if it could be shown that it got better at moving from side to side, that would start to look increasingly skill-like.

And I think it's that idea that the molecular changes could occur that would allow the plant to respond faster.

Or you could imagine selecting on a whole greenhouse of plants, and the ones that are able to switch faster

those are going to grow faster and then you select the ones that grow faster based upon their ability to learn in that generation so it kind of shows how you get this development of skill within a life that's development but then between generations you can also have the um entrenching or the canalizing of learned skill like language

And skillful performance in this paper and in our slides, it's kind of like we're hinting a lot at this full body type performance, high jump and things like that.

But of course, language is maybe one of the examples of skilled performance.

It's a motor behavior.

It involves a huge number of interacting motor subunits, voice box and the mouth.

And...

speech therapists and others that they go deep into that but speech is almost like the case where you say well surely instructions are being passed that's maybe the the high watermark for where interactionism could go would be to have a speech

a framing of speech that moved us beyond instructionism because this seems like clearly the transmutation of semantic or symbolic information into not directly related motor behavior.

So that would be kind of a nice case to investigate.

And Dave wrote in the chat, it seems odd that dogmas that have been known to be false for decades are still premises of so much funded professional activity.

I'm thinking of BF Skinner's insistence that all control activity must be strictly cortical, even though it's been known since at least the 50s, purely on the basis of speed of nerve conduction, that that would prevent graceful walking, let alone faster and more intricate movements.

So that's pretty interesting.

we have almost just anatomical reasons to know that not everything can go through this sort of control and cognition in the loop.

There's just not fast enough transduction along the nerves.

So there has to be this sort of distributed function more consistent with an interactionist framework than an instructionist framework.

Yet it's easy to fall back to,

Instructionism, maybe, especially for professionalized areas.

Let's go to optimal control, blue, if you want to, feel free to add anything that you'd like.

Optimal control theory is a nice bridge point.

because in the paper, and as we'll be going into, we're again, thinking about motor behavior, but control theory is something that applies to the electrical grid, to logistics, to,

robotics which are i guess motorized but optimal control theory is a framework that expands to many non-motor systems as well so that makes me wonder about whether we can also apply that instructionism versus interactionism contrast to control theoretic situations that

are implicitly instructionist.

Like there's an algorithm and then it sends the buy order to the unit that makes the purchase on a market.

Or it sends a certain piece of information to a different computer that then enacts that suggestion.

And then even in systems where we know instructions are being sent, like computer systems, maybe there's an interactionist way to think about that too.

Any other thoughts or?


SPEAKER_02:
Does optimal control essentially place all of our chips on the top down aspect of the relationship between top down and bottom up?

Does it optimal control, say, optimization happens exclusively from a top-down directionality that there is really no place for the bottom-up part?


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's a good question, and I'll skip to this Friston 2011 paper, which is entitled, What is Optimal About Motor Control?

I wonder if um that optimality does arise from the top or um what is optimal once we move beyond instructionism there's a perfect set of instructions there's a perfect way to do it and then that is either carried out faithfully or it's not


SPEAKER_02:
So philosophically, if you said optimal would be some openness to both an ability to recapitulate and an ability to discover, to be able to put those two things into some sort of coherent relationship.

I'm not saying that that's what is being said here, but I'm just not sure why we always assume that optimal is always about being able to create copies.

Even in skillful performance, even compared to a standard, there are things that happen when a gymnast does their routine where some...

some element of the variability that applied to that situation is considered when something is being judged.

I think the only thing that doesn't factor in variability is the clock, right?

Like you either ran 9.8 seconds or you didn't.

But many of the skillful performances that we pay attention to,

aren't always about recapitulation.

So it's interesting.

I don't know.

I guess, again, it's all how you define it.

But we actually want to get on to doing something useful here.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, and also here's a line in that first in 2011 that reminds me of Dave's comment, which is these estimates, which are coming from a predictive processing or active inference framework can finesse problems incurred by sensory delays in the exchange of signals between the central and peripheral nervous system.

So the generative model can include space for that delay

When we think about just sort of two people who are talking and accounting for each other's delay, for example, in that kind of an interaction versus the send, process, wait, send back model, there's actions that happen faster.

Another example of that maybe would be like baseball, where there's such a small amount of time to decide whether to initiate the behavior of swinging.

um and this paper from 10 years ago laid out just such an interesting difference between value learning and active inference which allows for that pragmatic and the epistemic component the optimal

suggests multiple things.

First off, it kind of suggests that there is an optimum that is being achieved.

So that's one easier point just to say, okay, well, maybe there's an optimal way, maybe there's not an optimal way.

But what is being optimized is the value.

Just like reinforcement learning, what's being implicitly optimized here is a value function.

And just as it says here, the replacement of value and cost functions with prior beliefs about movements removes the optimal control problem completely.

So this idea of the value and cost, it's kind of like an economic analysis of motor behavior.

So then let's just imagine that any number of circumstances, like somebody has a...

belief about how a performance will be viewed socially well you could couch that in reward and you could try to go break down from the narrative and the social all the way down to the movement of the fingers on the piano about the value and well if you mess up it's a lower value action but you're getting really far away from the embodiment of the performance which maybe doesn't have

that same sort of cost all the way down so it's like will we have cost functions and economics all the way down and value and cost or will we have generative models and an instrumental way of thinking about action blue anything overall otherwise also anyone who's watching lives welcome to ask a related or an unrelated question

I'm good.

Anything after last week's discussion that you'd been thinking about?


SPEAKER_00:
I'm trying to remember last week's discussion.

Refresh my memory.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, that's what this first part is.

Let's go to figure one and two of the paper.

And

take a more formal look at uh and we can go to first in 2011 if we want more details on the similarities and differences because this is kind of the core of the contrast between optimal optimal motor control theory and active inference it's going to come down to the differences in how these models are framed because there's an interpretive layer but

the heart of it it's the differences between these two kinds of models between figure one and figure two here so in figure one uh and we'll go to the juxtaposition in figure one and figure two we have in both cases the plant kinetics which are defined with the exact same equations um and the sensory mapping so this

Red box is the same between both of the models, between optimal motor control on the left and ACT-INF on the right.

And there is still an optimal control module in Active Inference.

So that is...

interesting but if we look a little closer we can see that in figure one that uh motor commands that u with a tilde over it it's the minimization so it's optimization you know minimization maximization sometimes by minimizing the cost you maximize the profit or it's

flippable, throw a negative sign in there and a min becomes a max.

So here what's being minimized is an integral of potentially the cost function, C of X and U for changes in time.

So cost is being minimized through time and that is optimal control in that framework.

When we look at the optimal control,

In the active inference model, we see a really different structure, even of that optimal control module.

We see that u, which is playing a similar role, it's not a command, but it's still being passed, this u function, is still related to a minimization, but what's happening inside of the equation is very different.

And we can...

go to the Fristen figure caption to see what is happening there.

That E, curly E, is the distinction between exteroceptive, which is E with little e, and proprioceptive, E with a P, reporting on hidden states in extrinsic and intrinsic frames of references, respectively.

These prediction errors are the difference between sensory input observed and predicted.

so going back to here what's being minimized isn't the cost function through time even philosophical disagreements with homo economicus aside okay let's put aside cost

And then there's the challenge of assigning costs to different kinds of states.

What's being minimized here is the cost through time.

I mean, don't businesses try to do that?

Everyone wants to figure out how to minimize cost through time.

It's challenging to do.

What's being done here?

The minimization between the proprioceptive sensory differential with a multiplication potentially through time, not sure what that does in the model.

it just so interesting that um the minimization here is just like we've talked about in so many of these discussions it's about your generative model of action and sensory outcomes sensory outcomes are emitted by hidden underlying states that you can't directly observe like you don't know exactly whether it's night or day but you are getting photons or not so there's a hidden state that's being

evaluated that's the sort of hidden markov model component and the hidden state is in the model emitting states that are being observed as sensory outcomes and in active inference the depth of that generative model is actually such that instead of having a really rich generative model of cost functions and then trying to reverse engineer your cost function to find the cheapest behavior

generative model is of expected sensory outcomes like every time i move my shoulder here it starts to hurt and we don't need to introduce a concept of reward or cost into that equation we can suffice to say that there is a generative model of the sensory outcomes under different motor policies and the organism has a preference for let's just say being in non-painful states

It sidesteps that question of cost in a way where we can see that even from the side by side, even where there is an optimal control element, like a minimization element, what's being minimized is something that is very, very different.

And that's one of the key aspects of active inference that what's being minimized is the divergence between expected outcomes and realized outcomes.

That's what of course makes it so related to predictive coding, predictive processing, rather than drawing only on the reinforcement learning type approaches that are doing a minimization, implicitly maximization on reward.


SPEAKER_02:
Daniel, can I color in a little bit too?

Please.

When I saw this, it was interesting because what I saw was not, I guess it was a replacement.

So on the figure one, it's due estimation.

And then in figure two, what I saw was the removal of that and the application of a rule.

minimize prediction errors.

That's the rule as opposed to a step.

And all I thought about was, for example, Hippocratic oath.

I don't know what I should be doing in terms of this patient, but the rule is do no harm.

So I think that's what I thought was really interesting here is that an actual step was replaced with a rule.


SPEAKER_03:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_02:
And that to me was the big differentiator, the introduction of rules.

That's why I asked last week, when you changed the rules of the game for the plant, I know the affordance has changed and I know the tools were introduced and all of that stuff, but I keep coming back to tools, rules and pools.

Tools being obvious, rules being obvious, pools just being an aggregation of resources.

And so I think if you're able to sort of coordinate all three, it gives you a different sense of what might be going on.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, a fun thought on that just to think about game playing.

The rules are always in effect and the rules can be explicit or implicit.

Like it's a rule in chess that you have to move out of check or figure out how to get out of check.

But then there's sort of what are equivalent to rules.

Like if a piece is pinned, it can't move but you don't need to state that as a rule.

So rules are, they're simultaneous.

They're always in effect unless there's another rule and they can breed emergence.

You just say, okay, here's how the pieces move, and then here's check.

Those are the rules.

And then it's as if there's a rule that is you can't move out of a pinned piece.

So rules always in effect allow for the space of emergence.

Steps have to be sequential.

And so it's almost like we're moving from the within a round of a game.

That's the instructionist.

Okay, you're playing risk.

First, roll the die.

Now, see whether the three is higher than the two die or whatever it happens to be.

And interactionism is pulling us back to like the rules and the pattern that still there can be sequential interaction.

instructions or sequential information can occur.

But it is very different to have rules rather than specified steps.

So let's see.

We're building up.

Yeah, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
Just one last thing.

So when I would ask young people to watch a video clip of something, and I would ask them to draw three columns and title them tools, rules and pools, and find examples, find tokens of each.

What do you think was the easiest thing for them to accumulate under?

It was tools.

Those have got the edges.

What was the second highest aggregation?

tools because they could they could literally figure out what was congregating what was the hardest thing the parallel processing which is what you just described it's always going off the sequential is much easier to account for the parallel processing the happening

as co-occurrence is the hardest thing for people when you're walking into a novel situation to take account of.

So you can say it, it's just being aware of it and finding examples of it that's really, really hard for most minds.


SPEAKER_00:
So even from a computational aspect, the parallelizing functions make them speed up so much, right?

But they also are so computationally intensive, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, exactly.

Dave has another great comment on this slide.

He wrote, I'm looking for where time is applied in the two approaches.

The intrinsic frame of reference for ACT-INF is U tilde of T. So that's, we'll zoom in a little bit on just figure two.

Here's that U tilde of T passing through the intrinsic frame of reference.

but there's no explicit T in the optimal control formula.

We can just see that motor commands U tilde are passed.

So there's kind of like a timelessness to, you know, contract this muscle.

It's not contract this muscle now, it's actually just a timeless statement.

So T he says, whereas T is inside the optimal control formula,

here is t, dt, it's a derivative through time and not in the intrinsic frame of reference.

as seen in Act-Inf.

So he asked whether that tells us where the approaches are taking account of time differently.

I think that's a great question.

How does time play a role differently in these two frameworks?

Let's keep on looking for similarities and differences.

So we have rules, not steps for active inference.

We introduce a time dependence of that downward motor signal.

We have, of course, a deep generative model component.

we have state estimation, that's the Hamlet joke.

There's this whole module that's clearly different in optimal motor control, which is the state estimation.

And that's what doesn't need to be done in active inference is this state estimation of, okay, given the sensory input we're getting, like I'm getting, you know, two thirds of my proprioceptors here and one third here are firing.

So let's estimate that the arm is here.

Okay, now pass that to the next part of the model.

Given that the arm is here, what happens?

we want to get the arm to okay now given which side of where we want the arm to go to we estimate the optimal and the actual r send the command you know turn the steering wheel to the side to bring it into alignment with the optimal or the most rewarding state so state estimation is in optimal motor control theory but in active inference you just don't have it

And that's sort of an interesting piece to drop out of the model because we don't need to have an explicit representation or an explicit variable with the location of the arm.

So that's a rule.

It's like John Cage, everybody has the best seat.

It's almost like it's enough to just say you're on the ocean, you're sailing, and then you're going to be trying to reduce your uncertainty as you pursue policies that in your generative model of the world, which includes latent causes,

So the deep generative model includes like latent causes of the world, which are not anywhere to be seen in this optimal motor control theory.

Like there's a deep latent cause that if too much weight is on, you know, this branch, it's going to break.

But where's that?

the constraints of the niche or something that's deep about the nation not there so anyways it's like you're in the boat you want to be reducing your uncertainty about getting the sensory states that you want like seeing that land look bigger reflecting you being closer but you don't need to have that gps coordinate where am i okay now where do i want to be and how are we going to get there

it's enough to actually have a sensory preference and then reduce your uncertainty on the trajectory of reaching that sensory outcome.

So that's a big difference in active inference.

And I'm seeing even a few more.

Let's look at the green boxes.

So in the green box for figure one, we have a forward model.

So they write that the function of the forward model

is to improve the execution of action.

It's kind of funny, you know, executive office or the executive component of the government, it's about executing.

That's where the instructions are issued from, executive orders.

Improve the execution of action by helping to finesse the inferences of the state estimator.

So again, it's in feedback with the state estimate, and then it's sending an effort copy.

So that's outgoing is efference.

And so there's this feedback between the prediction of basically where the body is in this case, and then that gets sent.

It's kind of interesting that the X comes from a state estimation.

That's the where is the arm.

And then the forward model is the forward model of motor control.

That is what connects with this U tilde.

That's the green box, that forward model in Optimal Motor Control.

Whereas in Active Inference, we have a different forward model.

It's a forward model of X as well as V, which is the prior belief.

So again, there doesn't need to be a forward model of position and motor action as happening here.

it's enough potentially to have a model of action and over beliefs.

We can look at the first in caption to see a little bit more closely.

Yeah, any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_02:
I think the state estimator to go back, I think one live stream

State estimator says that there have to be ties between the two rails to stabilize those ties so that some processing can take place.

I think what this talks about is the fact that we know that there's a gradient, we know the train is gonna roll downhill as long as there's a gradient.

It's a rule as opposed to trying to stabilize the relationship between the ties of the railroad.

Two very different ways of looking at something.

And I think that this goes kind of back to what I said.

I think there are times when we do give ourselves instructions and then there are times when we simply parallel process because we have a rule.

I don't want to make mistakes because that doesn't serve my goals or my target.

And I think, again, I just suggest

that the inclusion of both is probably to our advantage.

It's just that what we tend to do is give all of our, we've been trained to give all of our attention over to making sure that the thing is stabilized.


SPEAKER_01:
nice also one piece of first in 2011 that's not brought over to this paper figure one was that motor control figure two is predictive coding and motor control so already we see the um reduction of the model in the terms of the state estimate goes away

You don't need to explicitly have a state estimator because the state estimator has now been subsumed into the forward model, which is why crucially the mapping from hidden states to sensations is now part of the forward generative model.

So we have a generative model of what we expect.

And now with predictive coding, instead of keeping a variable of what we think is happening,

which can be tracked through time and all that, we're simplifying that state estimator by including the expectations about the state estimator in our forward model.

That's predictive coding.

How does that differentiate from active inference?

that's a good question here we have plant kinetics sensory mappings forward model and optimal control with a cost function still coming in you still see that integral with the minimization of motor commands u over time whereas in active inference again we're moving from it's more valuable to be getting the signals i like and i like rewarding things

to I'm just bringing the sensory outcomes into alignment with expectations and I'm selecting policies based upon which ones I think are gonna get me there.

And then this section that I had highlighted

In summary, the tenet of optimal control lies in the reduction of optimal motion to flow on a value function like the downhill flow of water.

So that's pragmatic value.

And that's awesome because think about how much work has been done on information flows in the last 10 years.

Conversely, in active inference, the flow is specified directly in terms of the equations of motion that constitute prior beliefs like patterns of wind flow.

The essential difference, so how do we go from water going downhill on the value, gradient descent or up and down again, they kind of get flipped around, but how do we go from just thinking about what direction does gravity take you?

That's value, that's reward.

There's one answer.

Which policy for financial outcomes is gonna have a higher value?

That's that scalar estimate of value.

The essential difference is that prior beliefs in active inference can include solenoidal flow.

So this is where we're opening up the whole discussion of play.

So I hope that we can think about that for a second.

And Friston says, you know, he doesn't want to overstate the shortcomings of optimal control.

So it's not that you can't introduce a solenoidal component to value.

You can have the idea of solenoidal flow circulating on iso contours.

But how many businesses stop and say, you know, let's not pick the most rewarding number.

Let's look for maybe it's not the most rewarding number, but then there's the most solenoidal play around that number.

People say, but we're not going to be doing those.

So why would we stop at, you know, 5000 feet when we know that we can get to 6000 feet?

And solenoidal flow and the ability to have that pragmatic and epistemic, that directed and the solenoidal components opens up the space of play, hopefully.

So what do you think about that?

Or does that...

I'll put up this slide where we had separated out this optimal motor control theory with a value only.

That's the one thing that this robot is tracking, is the slope and the altitude.

Its following is uphill as much as it can, so it can get to the top of mount value.

Whereas in active inference, we're using the Helmholtz decomposition, which is related to the physics of flow on vector fields,

that is going to reduce to these two irreducibly separated components so like they're totally orthogonal they don't have redundant information they have totally separate information there is the value component the straight line but there's also this equal value solenoidal flow any thoughts on that you explained it really well

Here's a comment from Dave, while people are thinking.

Giving oneself instructions can refer to something real and useful if one interprets the execution of the instruction appropriately.

I'm referring to playing a piece of music without touching the instruments, which can be nearly as effective as actually playing.

If the challenge is to simply touch the right stops at the right moments, this can actually be more affecting.

Empowered machine operators may seem less efficient than highly regimented ones, but may over time get to far more effective overall operations.

Dean, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_02:
Again, I completely agree.

My only question is, so why are more people not picking up on the potential of this and the value of having an awareness of both?


SPEAKER_00:
So I think it's maybe just getting started in a computational way.

I mean, we've explored some computation papers looking at how to optimize a given task computationally.

So I think that it will...

gain traction, right?

It's just so new.

I mean, not active inference as a concept, but the practical applications of active inference, I think, are just starting to be explored.

And I think that the play...

aspect is important.

I mean, because it's like how we learn, right?

Exploring or playing or, you know, these types of things give rise to real learning, even if it's accidental learning, like not necessarily effort directed.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

I think it's also, I think it's something some has to do with a perception that

play doesn't necessarily generate value, which is kind of sad because there's so many examples where it does.

The outcomes of play cause your mind to go off in so many because it's supposed to be about distribution.

This is a kind of a way of encouraging that distribution.

And yet, for some reason, it just doesn't get the same respect.

So.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm just thinking about the pipeline from basic to translational to applied to sort of infused research.

Like once, oh, everybody knows that.

Once basic though becomes applied and then becomes every day.

So let's just imagine that we're going back shooting on that skilled performance slide.

Well, if we have implicitly or explicitly, if we're working under this optimal motor control function,

we're thinking, okay, maybe people's biomechanics differ, but for each person's biomechanics, there is an optimal way to shoot a free throw.

And we want people to have a more accurate modeling of where their hand is on the ball so that they can execute the movement better so that we can get the reward, score the points, put the ball in the hoop.

And so it relates to having people

practice or maybe get input on your hand was a little bit off here relative to the coach's expectations of where the hand should be um

But then there's this whole question about visualization and about what Dave was saying, like playing the music without touching the instrument and the ability that was almost discovered in a bottom-up way of changing beliefs about one's performance, rehearsing mentally, but also changing beliefs about performance, influencing motor behavior.

That is more consistent with what we see in active inference.

And so there's just multiple things that previously would be seen as sort of exceptions or quirks of a pure motor control

system like incorporating these deeper elements of our generative model um all the way up to even like the psychological like maybe your generative model is that your team is fated to lose so then you do choke in that moment because like you know you didn't psychologically want to win or whatever and that's as dina's we're always joking about like the interview with the athletes right after the game it's like i wanted to win or something like that like

they're not going to give you that third person.

My hand, you know, was on the wrong spot on the ball.

It just, we're seeing how

now as we have just like blue said more computational modeling that recognizes interactionism and that recognizes deep generative models it will be possible to start to slide some of these examples from being like quirky outliers to actually sketching out the structure of inference and action

instead of just being seen as this one weird trick that's going to help you learn free throws.

It'll be like, that's always about your generative model, and that includes you as being a team player, for example.

It always is going to include that, and then it's going to come down to maybe being modeled better by active inference rather than a reward-based framework.

Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
So I just was thinking like, you know, in your, you said you, you were exploring like the, the dynamic, you were, you were going through the dynamic that was like exploration and then doing something intentionally, like learning how to do it and then like perfecting a skill.

Right.

And I was thinking like you left off the end of that, like, uh, just like from a societal like standpoint, right?

Like we explore new things, like not thinking as an organism, but thinking as, as a social structure.

We explore new things, we set out the intention to complete those new things, we perfect those new things, and then we forget them.

So does that come into play in this?

I wonder, because I think about scaling active inference a lot, not in the way that we talked about scaling active inference in the paper, scaling active inference, but just as from small components of a system to systems.

And, you know, in that scaling, like, so are we missing something about forgetting, right?

Like handwriting, if you think about like learning cursive, you know, that was something like people start out scribbling on paper, little kids, you know, they're playing and they're drawing and whatever.

And then they intend to learn cursive, they perfect cursive.

But like as a society, we're not teaching that anymore.

So they don't know cursive.

And it's like typing, like now we have voice translation.

So we don't know typing anymore.

I mean, these types of things like are influential in a society.

So

Does that come into play here?

Like where I've talked about before, you know, thinking about doing something like entering the flow state, right?

When we talked about the flow last live stream, you know, it's like you have the intention to do something and like you think about doing something, but when you're really a skilled performer, you enter that flow state and you forget about doing it.

You just do it.

It's just magically accomplished.

So is that like flow state comparable to this like forgetting of like

as a society right so so when you enter that flow state and like you're doing something magically like just with your kinesthetic memory and you're perfect at it does that compare to society like forgetting a task because we've already mastered it like we're we forgot about that we're on to the next thing i wonder if that's relevant anyway sorry if i rambled


SPEAKER_01:
No, it's really nice.

Here's what it made me think about was instructions, again, implicitly or explicitly, they have to be remembered or forgotten.

Because if they're not remembered along the chain or at least in the RAM of the computer, it's like they're never carried out.

If you started a sentence and they forgot what the first part was by the end of the step, they can't carry out the instructions.

So instructions, we think about symbolic, representation, remembering, and forgetting.

But with interactions...

it doesn't have to be remembered or forgotten.

It's actually just experienced.

Like in the ant colony, the interactions between ants, they don't have to be remembered.

It updates the generative model of each nestmate, and then they continue on their path.

but it's actually just experienced and that's enough in an interactionist framework rather than being remembered.

I'm not sure if that gets at it.

I think it's a great point about how as something becomes pervasive and other skills and scaffolds are layered over it, there is a forgetting that can happen, but also it's like we don't even need to have memorization of everything.

I remember hearing from different college majors and somebody would say, somebody would say what major they were and somebody else would say, oh, well that one always was too much memorization.

Like there was, that was too much memorizing.

And then for that person, it wouldn't be who it was their major.

It wouldn't be too much memorizing.

It just seemed like it was parts of a bigger picture.

And so they didn't feel like they were memorizing little factoids, but rather just interacting with the material.

Not sure.

Dean, what do you think about that?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, well, Blue, you didn't say this, but you touched on something that's mattered to me for a really long time, and that is

Should we scale bottom up or does it sort of exist in its own realm?

Because that's the thing that you basically said.

I taught for a long time and it bothered me greatly that all the learning from haptic movement was disappearing into a keyboard.

So we top down that one and then we forgot about it because top down basically erased the bottom up.

We seem to think that if we top down it, if we give it an app, we can now forget about it.

And I find that crazy because I've had many quite...

heated debates with people who want to take another bottom-up exercise where we can really learn something and get some joy out of discovery and say, well, I'm going to scale that.

And I say, leave it alone.

Leave it alone.

It's a bottom-up thing.

What are you doing?

I know you can top down it, but why can't we just let it explore a little bit and figure things out for itself?


SPEAKER_00:
So Dean, you really touched on something there with like the haptic movement.

And, you know, I like personally learn super well by writing things down.

Like I take notes, I throw the notes away.

I never look back at them again.

They're all processing.

It's the act of physically writing something down that helps me learn.

And I mean, sometimes I do look back at my notes, but mostly not.

I just take them to commit things to memory.

And, you know, my daughter was really struggling with learning her times tables, right?

She's like doing these flashcards and the Quizlet app and all this stuff.

And I had her manually copy, you know, like the times tables and, you know, instantly like within a month she had them down and just like destroyed the standardized tests, like where they do math computation, which is just like rote memorization of your math facts and how fast can you do it?

She got like a hundred percent and she's, you know, at like off the charts for her grade level in testing.

So anyway, it's, it's really very interesting.

real and actual, but in that kinesthetic memory.

And this goes back to that motor command and the disappearance of the motor command.

And so this is what I think about these two juxtapositions.

And I think there is a space where you do issue a motor command, at least for me.

There is a space where it's like, okay, I need to put my right foot in front of my left

foot and walk along to learn to balance.

I'm issuing a command to myself to execute some task.

But there are many times where you do not issue that motor command.

I mean, think about if you've ever tried to learn to play the piano, placing your fingers on the keys and stuff, and then you just do it.

There's no command at that space.

And so there's a mental, a kinesthetic something that happens where you transition between having to issue the command and not having to issue the command.

And this is something that I'm excited to talk to the authors about if they are able to join us on a live stream.

Because I don't know, where does that step?

Where does that step get erased in active inference?

I mean, we aren't always just, we aren't always commandless, I think.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll just put one more, one last thing on that.

If I think of myself, if I think of myself separately from the neck down, everything from the neck down is giving me the bottom up.

My brain is way up here.

There's things that are supporting that, that are giving me that chance to bottom up.

I don't want those things to disappear.

I don't want to be a head on a cart.

I don't want to be like that plant with just my head going back and forth between lights.

When do we stop saying that everything has to... Like I said, you didn't say this.

But I've had so many people say, oh, Dean, all the stuff that you're doing is great and you create all these unicorns and all these young people are able to go out and contribute in professional settings, but it's not scalable.

And I go, what do you mean it's not scalable?

Every one of these things is a bottom-up example that it can happen as long as you don't try to top down it to death.


SPEAKER_01:
interesting the part about the body and the neck reminded me of ken wilbur's centaur stage of development which is sort of like uh along the integral psychological trajectory there's a step where there it's like half human half horse and so it's like one step beyond kind of a human in dialogue with a horse as two separate entities there starts to be like a fusion

in his framework moving towards non-dual framings but there's that stage where it's like uh the top down the bottom up but you know our brain is further out just gravitationally so it makes it seem like it's the top down piece but you know what about a person upside down

Then is it bottom-up signaling?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, you've already pointed him out.

He's on the edge of a building back there about 10 slides.


SPEAKER_01:
Or people on the other side of the world.

They're upside down.

And I think asking about speech and sign language...

could be interesting because I think those are gonna be the challenge cases for symbolic, the last bastion of instructionism and symbolic messages being passed

maybe is happening through language.

Whereas with this sort of elegant, skillful performance model, maybe you go, okay, I can see where predictive processing is coming into play, where it's not just about value.

Okay, so if predictive processing is an improvement from reinforcement learning or from optimal motor control, then I guess I could see why active inference builds upon predictive processing.

So that's the pipeline, the act-inf.

down the rabbit hole pipeline for some but i think when it actually is semantic or symbolic what is being performed that'll be where on one hand there's going to be resistance because it's going to seem the most instructionist but on the other hand i think we're going to tap into the richness of active inference to have a deep generative model including semantic information whereas the semantics are not in this motor control

framing so it'll be like double or nothing with active inference for some of the symbolic cases uh blue yeah i just wanted to go back to what um dean was saying earlier about bottom up and um like i don't know uh


SPEAKER_00:
like using active inference and modeling active inference in like a bottom up and nested way is super, super interesting to me.

And I just am wondering, like, when are we going to crack that walnut?

Because it's going to happen.

I feel like we're we're teetering, you know, on the edge of that.

What will that look like?


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, yeah.

What will it look like or what will be a system where we can explore it in?


SPEAKER_00:
I mean, maybe the active in France, I think is maybe maybe Daniel will grace us with we get to do his paper one day.

We can do it soon.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
The only thing I'll add is that we have to people that are participating in this and really are going, oh, my goodness, we're really on the cusp of something.

Just have to be willing to go over the edge of the cliff.

And I'm not joking.

It's the letting go of all of the habits that we formed to get to this place because most people didn't get to, we didn't, the three of us didn't get here through active inference.

That came after a whole bunch of things that were more instructionalist.

And to step back, it would be much easier than to go over.

If we've got the prospecting, the proposition, and the provisions in place, we'll go over the edge.

And it'll all be fine.

It'll actually be quite thrilling.


SPEAKER_01:
I really like that.

Sort of that come to the edge.

There's a different thought chain when you're climbing the ladder to the high jump.

We've all jumped off of something that was...

scary or something like that.

There's a different thought process when you're climbing, maybe because your motor behavior is grounded.

You're on the ladder or you're on the mountain going up.

That's one mode.

That's actually like approach.

But then right at the end, the mind goes blank.

and you know the mind will say jump jump jump but there's that resistance and that reminds me one of the few times that i've used vr goggles um it was like you walked into an elevator this was like a scenario walk into an elevator and then it carried you up a building and you could see yourself getting higher and higher up and then the elevator doors opened and you looked down and it was just like dropping off a building and

it felt like my foot was just glued to the ground.

Like I felt like I could not take a step forward, even though I could inch my foot forward and I could see that it was, that I hadn't moved, that I was still just on a flat ground.

It was like,

it just stopped motor behavior to know that it would be resulting in some unpleasant situations in the usual case.

So Dean, what do we say to those who are not sure if they want to go to the cliff?

What do we say to those who are walking towards the cliff?

And then what do we do with those who are on the edge?


SPEAKER_02:
This is a fantastic question because this is the nut of the problem.

So do you want instructionalism extended into the active inference realm?

Or do you realize that whatever identity you take on in terms of learning

with both eyes open with some instructionalism and some interactionism, I don't know what that will be for you or Blue or me.

I just know it won't be an extension of instructionism alone.

That's the counterfactual here.

I don't know what that will feel like as different any more than you knew

what the difference was going to be in terms of releasing to gravity as opposed to pushing against it as you were climbing up those stairs.

I just know that if you considered it to be just two more stairs as an extension of what you were already doing, you're going to be disappointed.

So I think that's the big question here.

When I used to say to kids, as long as you don't think that a field researcher is simply an intern outside of school, I don't know what that's going to feel like.

And I certainly don't know what that's going to look like because I'm not out there with you and your sponsors.

So how can you let go of what you know in order to realize this thing that nobody can give you a direct answer to?

That's a beautiful question, Daniel, because that for active inference is going to be the, that's the rule that's going to have to be discovered that even people who are spending a lot of time focusing on this right now and giving it formalisms and developing the,

the way to formalize the math are going to have to ask themselves.

Otherwise it's just going to be an extension of instructionalism.

And that would be sad.


SPEAKER_04:
Hmm.


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

It's like jumping off.

It's not a staircase in reverse.

right and um I think the idea would be maybe we already have flight suit on where it's like if you climb up that's the provision you climb you climb up with the provisions and then you know when you jump you're going to be able to do something that was just qualitatively different it's going to feel different it's going to be different it's going to be a different action

and wasn't the point of listening to instructions to change to update to be better or to be different and then it's like by being different and following that path we become who we are like somebody said i always wanted to be skilled in this martial art so then they trained along the way to become who they wanted to be and that was them being who they wanted to be it's a lot of

sort of loose associations.

But again, I think we're working towards making it happen.


SPEAKER_02:
It is and it isn't though, because instructionalism, my point was that the instruction stopped.

I cannot give you a description of what that will look and feel like.

So you're going to have to interact with it

That's, there's not, it's not a negotiable.

If you really want to be there, you have to let go of the instructionalism.

So I don't think that's a loose association.

That's a non-negotiable.

Now you may not like it and you may not go there.

You may step back from the edge and that's fine.

But don't think that I'm, or other people that are actually

looking at active inferences as a second eye open, won't be aware of what you're transpiring, whether you're going over or whether you're stepping back.

That's not a loose association.

That's pretty clear.


SPEAKER_01:
Lou, any...

Thoughts on that?

I guess my question would be, let's just stay with this sort of like climbing the instructions to get to the space of interactions.

What?

Yeah, Blue, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
So it just as like climbing the instructions to get to the space of interactions, like I feel like something is there that is has to do with like the bottom up and the scaling.

Like, you know, in the systems, like we are climbing the instructions as you know, parts of a system until we get to to that space as a system.


SPEAKER_01:
the rules well it's like okay we have the ladder going up or you know staircase going up to the jumping off point you could frame that in terms of instructions go to the second step go to the third step go to the fourth step instructionism all the way i mean our interactionism all the way it's like it gives you the rule walk forward

so you can replace on a structured ascension you can replace the sequential instructions with a rule or a pattern so that it's interactionism all the way down all the way up and that kind of relates to active as a scale free framework like bottom up from where blue

Are you going to start with subatomic or where is the kernel going to be?

And maybe just interactions all the way down.

And then at some sufficient level, you can granularize or you can coarse grain, you can make something look as if it has instructions.


SPEAKER_00:
So I wonder if it's like, you know, you see this loop, right?

The active inference loop, and it's like an oval like this.

And so I wonder if it's like, starts to be like the structure of an atom.

Like, okay, there's like this oval that's this way.

And then I wonder if I could superimpose one going the other way, a vertical and a horizontal, like a little one of these things.

So that, you know, because there's this across scales as we scale up and down.

You know, is there a loop going between and then a loop going this way?

Possibly.

Probably.

I don't know.

I think about it in that way.


SPEAKER_01:
So this could be the S orbital.

This is just like a spherical one.

And maybe there's other trajectories or flows that have different shapes.

so dave wrote in there and anyone else in this last little bit is welcome to write a comment dave wrote in most effective military units troops are told what to accomplish not what to do so that's the difference between for me like push and pull push you know lift the bar is like it's a command about what to do versus like

when it's an accomplishment.

And so it's the teleos or the end directedness that pulls the person.

And then in that pull, there is the space to have the solenoidal flow, to walk straight towards the goal where there's a clear path.

but then to be like, oh yeah, but then I'm hitting a wall.

So in order to accomplish, I do have to walk around.

Of course, that makes sense in the context of being pulled by a goal, but that's where the instruction-based robotics always fails because anytime there's something that requires a deviation from value, you need a total second layer of the model to reintroduce curiosity or epistemic gain into the value framework.

So then it's this question, how do you balance all these second layer bolt-ons so that you can still salvage your value-driven model, even when there's aspects that are just clearly better framed within a pragmatic epistemic distinction, Blue?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's like solving the problem without ground truth data, right?

Like, so how do we, you know, if we don't know, if we've never been exposed to the system before, if it's not programmed into our robotic function,

You know, how do we account for that, right?

So I think that that's where the exploration and the play a lot comes in.


SPEAKER_01:
Or maybe tossing and turning.

Like you want to be comfortable and then it just sort of uncoordinated behavior that's just rummaging around, searching for something in a box or all these examples where it's so, you couldn't say that that twist of your side, it was, it's not skillful.

least for me but it's also not reward driven again you need a way second level bolt on to be explaining how the rummaging behavior is itself value driven you can say that there is a value that's pulling or you want the valuable thing in that box but that's we all agree on that we all agree that there's something valuable in the box and that search behavior is going to be required

are we going to have a process theory that allows for exploration and then zeroing in on a goal or will we have a process theory that tries to go like well if the end is valuable then let's just back propagate value


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, or if we don't know what's valuable in the box, right?

Something is valuable in here.

Like, how do we find out what is it that's valuable?

Okay, so we implement the search function, but then exploring what is the valuable item out of, you know, 50 items in the box, right?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep, it's almost like in the simplest cases...

the value learning is defensible.

When we have this hill climbing robot on a single hill, okay, but now you got a triple bottom line.

You got the financial success, but you also have environmental and social considerations of a business.

So will you reduce all three of them to one of them or try to generate a fourth standard that you're going to reduce them all like a common currency for all of your values and rewards?

Or could there be a deep generative model where the organization has preferences in the financial, social and environmental realm, and then take stock of its action possibilities, not even described in the value mindset.

Maybe every time you have a meeting, it's like square zero, what can we do?

Whereas in active inference, we start with the space of policies, the affordances that the niche provides.

And so you don't need to consider policies that cannot be done.

And you should reweight policies accordingly to how likely or tractable they are.

So there's just so many ways that we see that the mathematical framings get expanded on through relaxation of some of their attributes, just like Frist in 2011 wrote, which is that optimal control can be cast as active inference with three simplifications.

And then he walked through those, which we discussed a little bit last time, but this is kind of cool how we're building out some differences between the motor control approaches that have been used in the past and active inference as a process theory.

And then the way that that encompasses what we've seen before, and then maybe also opens up the discussion

into just areas that weren't even considered.

Like we can add in affordances plus preferences.


SPEAKER_02:
I think that embodied skillful and active inference implies a huge leap of faith back to that jumping off the, because it is.

And I mean, that's not, that's a, that's a cliche that people can probably appreciate.


SPEAKER_01:
What do you think the trust or faith is in?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's it.

Yourself.

Yourself, right?

Or lack thereof.


SPEAKER_01:
Act or act not, there is no infer.

No, there is, there is.

So it's interesting, yeah.

How can we distill the similarities and differences so that when we see one of those limitations,

being like okay we had um uh curiosity slash pragmatic plus semistemic so that when we see a sort of here's the new hack on value we can see that as a saddle point

for where that model could move towards an active inference framing just by kind of rewiring some of the modules that it has.

Here's a great question from the live chat.

Bill wrote, would a priority parameter according to depletion levels of different resources be applicable?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's back to the pools thing.

Yeah, I would say yes.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay.

Dean with the pools, here would be my thought from the multi-scale decision making.

just think about a bee colony the resources that they need to forage for include like pollen which has a lot of protein and fat and it's helpful for the developing larva then nectar which is like high octane gasoline a lot of carbs good for the adults um and then depending on the environment they might need like water or salt or other different resources

So the depletion of, there might be an imbalance of the nutrients.

And you can think about that similarly for an organism, like rabbit starvation.

When you only eat protein, your body will enter starvation mode because other fats and stuff are needed.

So definitely multiple resources are being balanced.

And part of the challenge of decision-making under uncertainty, just as we've been getting at, is that there's not just one kind of outcome.

Like it's enough to be uncertain about value.

But now when we're thinking about these multi-dimensional resource landscapes, whether it's just protein versus carbs, or whether it's a lot more nuanced, like the triple bottom line, we really do need a principled way of talking about the relative depletion of different resources.

So in the bee colony case,

selection has shaped nest mates so that they use the rate and the type of interactions they have in order to update their nestmate level behavior so i'm having a lot of interactions with hungry larvae maybe we need more pollen i'm having a lot of interactions with food reservoirs maybe that can slow me down because we probably have enough um forage for now

so colonies that don't consist of nest mates with that productive way of interpreting their interactions not instructions those colonies are swept off the table and so we end up seeing distributed systems succeed where they act as if there is a correct prioritization amidst uncertainty of different kinds of resources

and then if we use active inference instrumentally in the deep generative model of the body's nutrient ratios or the colony's relative balance between protein and carbs then it's as if there is a priority parameter where when something is depleted it's the one that's prioritized but we don't need that expressively in the model

we can have a multi-dimensional generative model of different resources, and then actions will be selected according to their expected free energy being minimized, almost going along the curve that takes us on that edge of explore and exploit from wherever we are in that resource depletion landscape towards our preferences.

would be totally open to hearing other explanations or maybe there is a priority parameter that can come into play but one sort of longish response would be organisms do act adaptively to prioritize depleted resources but that doesn't mean that there needs to be a parameter in our model that explicitly prioritizes specific resources it's enough just to have a preference vector that includes multiple types of resources blue


SPEAKER_00:
No, I think that that's right.

So you can make it as simple or complicated as you want, but I always think less parameters in the model is better.


SPEAKER_01:
It just makes me think, how do we get those preferences?

And then what happens when the niche changes so that preferences that were adaptive

like to act as if prioritization of sugar and salt over all other preferences, for example.

What happens when the situation changes?

So how do we integrate high precision priors

with highly accurate sensory input that's something we've talked about before how do we get the best of both worlds with being able to like fly blind because we have a deep generative model but then also when there is sensory input that requires a categorical shift in cognitive model for example we want to have the fluidity to do that and we don't want to be wasting our time in one mode when

It's the wrong mode.

We don't want to be hard when hardness is a flaw or be soft when softness is a flaw.


SPEAKER_00:
So I wonder if there's, like, you know, I mean, for organisms like bees and birds, like, there's some programmed... I mean, things are shifting all the time, right?

Like, there's, you know, a huge amount of, like, migratory stuff that comes into play and hibernating and all these things, right?

And so, like, for us, like, we notice that prioritized, like...

shift like i need water right now right like you know if we're suddenly like parched right like the need for water is overwhelming but there's not this like because we have offloaded so much of our needs into our niche like the need for to stay warm or whatever we build houses we wear clothes so we've offloaded a lot of this stuff so i i wonder if it's like um

the instinct becomes less instinctual.

I wonder if that happens, like the instinct to sequester food or fly south for the winter or these types of things, just because we've just offloaded our need to do those things.

So it just becomes, I don't know, there.


SPEAKER_01:
I think that's another distinction here.

Here we can include extended slash embedded 4Es, 7Es, 11Es, however many there are.

We can at least frame those situations in terms of niche modification or niche construction.

Where is that in motor control?

It's nowhere.

Where's the golf club with a squishy handle?

that is being interacted with as an instrument, we don't have those nice interfaces.

Whereas Active Inference has excellent interfaces quantitatively and qualitatively for being enriched by pieces that are, as Dean would say, maybe non-negotiable for the actual creature.

but it'd be totally ad hoc, where would you put the instrumentation in here?

Is it a state estimator?

Should I be estimating where my golf club is?

Or is it enough just to estimate my hands and the angle of the hands and then do another second level prediction?

Not quite clear.

You could probably implement it multiple ways.

And here's another nice comment from Dave.

So Dave said, the term in cybernetics, so it's always good to connect back to related areas,

for putting drives into a model is algodonic.

So here's the definition of algodonic.

It comes from, I guess, algos meaning pain and hedon meaning pleasure.

Sorry, Dave, for the mispronunciation.

um putting multiple algodonic drives like pains and pleasures may yield complex instructive behaviors but there are so many advantages in having a model i think active inference so sophisticated that it generates its drives the drives come out of the model rather than being put in so yes and he wrote then clarifying i mean the innumerable drives emerge from the model's internal dynamics

If your robot is spontaneously curious, spontaneously attends to events or responsive externals, it's as if it has a curiosity parameter.

So it's true.

Maybe we could even write like drives, quote, you know, as if... I'm going to take Shakespeare.

Thanks, Hamlet.

You are a great prince.

Drives... Drives emerge from model...

don't need to be put in.

Instead of maybe the rabbit being put in the hat, this is like the rabbits emerge from the hat if you put in enough hydrogen and enough time.

That's interesting to think about where cybernetic models come into play here.

Let's give just a few final minutes.

Any final questions in the chat?

and thanks of course to dave and to phil for the great questions we can just think about um maybe dot one dean is um being on the edge dot zero is climbing and so it's a two-directional trail you know there's people going up to half dome and there's people coming down so dot zero is two-directional

Highway, lots of on-ramps and off-ramps, but we try to make the topics accessible for those who are not in the Active Inference game, but they're familiar with related topics like the keywords usually.

And in the .zero, we're going to go from bridging the keywords and the topics of broader concern to Active Inference.

So that's the onRamp to Active Inference.

But then also for those who are already in the Active Inference mode of learning by doing and working, then it's their window out to like, oh, wow, this idea that I had been working on Active Inference in one context, it's also applying outwards.

So that's in the .0.

.1, whoever and whenever it is,

uh we are in the the bathtub face the part between the bookends that's we're at the edge and we can look back to the dot zero and see again recapping the the steps that we took but also we want to start looking out and then i don't know where dot two would be but dot two is when we sort of take the next step and


SPEAKER_02:
The dot two is the no going back.

I mean, I can add a twist to the fact that I'm going to be hitting the water soon, and that's a skillful embodied movement, right?

We actually watch people that do the 10-meter platform and can add quite a few things before they hit the water and regain control.

But I think this is what interactionism is versus instructionalism.

I mean, the way that this is set up, the 0-1-2, is interactionism.

It's more about this than it is about bidirectionality.

And I think you talked about that at the beginning of today's episode.


SPEAKER_01:
Right, we have a structure that we hold to, a rail that we could modify as well, but we hold to the rail so that we don't have to frame it like instructions.

um we weren't instructed to do this and i don't know i hope that people don't feel like these are instructions but rather interactions or engagements with them and then just like so many other things that we're seeing online the new technological affordances allow it to actually be an interaction we actually can have people asking questions live

being a part of the conversation.

Whereas if it were just recording a video and releasing it or making a book and releasing it, it'd be hard to break out of the instructionist frame because the deliverable would be static and very unidirectional.

Here, we have a different affordance that helps us break out of that frame basically for free because even if instructions are being conveyed on the live stream,

it would still be within an interaction of participants, of individual and collective and of the community.

So any final thoughts?

on one no fun times thanks both of you for the the dot zero and dot one fun we've had a few hours to think about it but you know the paper is the distillation of many more hours so there's always value dare i say and going back and playing with it because it's fun

and it's just yep they're great topics to be considering about and learning so cool thanks everyone for watching thanks dean and blue and we'll see you next week for 23.2 thanks guys bye

## bjYUbKlfHUo

SPEAKER_02:
Greetings, everyone.

Welcome to ActInflab live stream number 23.2.

Today's June 15th, 2021.

And we're going to be having our dot two discussion on embodied skillful performance, where the action is.

And we'll see who else joins us live as we go through the slides in the paper.

And also, of course, if you're watching live, we'd welcome any questions or comments.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links that are on this slide.

This is recorded.

Greetings, Dave.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams we're again on june 15th having our second group discussion on embodied skillful performance where the action is so this is sort of our jumping off point and let's see if we can make it a skillful one

Today, the goals are really just to be discussing and learning, to be hearing the questions and points that people found really interesting when they were reading the paper, as well as see where our discussion can spontaneously go as, of course, participants join and leave.

And hopefully we get some fun questions from the chat.

And we're just going to walk through the paper and the slides, go where we need to go to hopefully connect some dots.

So with that being said, let's just go to the introductions and warmups.

And we can each just give an introductory thought

on the paper if we would like or something we liked or remembered something we're looking to resolve reduce our uncertainty on by the end of the discussion so i'm daniel i'm a postdoctoral researcher in california and i'll pass to dean hi i'm dean i'm uh in calgary and i'm uh becoming a more uh embedded personality in this active inference lab


SPEAKER_03:
world and I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

I'm doing a practice-based PhD through the UK.

I'm interested in participatory theatre, community development and ways to understand how people interact with each other in groups and individually.

So this paper is quite relevant as it opens up some new avenues in that.

And I will pass it over to, is Dave here?

Dave, hello Dave.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, Dave, if you can speak otherwise, no worries.

Maybe you're just listening in.

So maybe just a quick question.

Steven, where do we see the connection between skillful performance, which is often thought of like motor and bodily?

How do we connect that to social practices, which are amongst bodies and use verbal behavior or symbolic behavior?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I mean, this is kind of a question I think that's arising more and more as people are trying to question psychology or community psychology, which works on the individual, or sociology, which works on this sort of mass of people.

But when you want to work with intersubjectivity and sort of small groups and understanding the dynamics that are going on there,

um you could kind of ask phenomenological questions about what it's like to be in that state which is kind of a bit more direct than say someone's psychological perspective on it but it's still not quite working so then you say well let's so get into action here let's get into what's actually happening in and amongst people um and often if you then jump into action that's another abstracted area but if you're in the area of practice

You're kind of in between.

You know, it's something that people are doing, something that people are doing between each other.

But you're still able to talk about how it's happening, how it feels.

So I think that...

But this question of practice then takes you into the sort of areas that get used a lot in arts, arts practice, theatre practice, all these types of areas.

So I think it's quite a nice nexus that's normally a bit impenetrable.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

It makes me wonder, do groups have skill or is skill something that only bodies have?

So you see some football team or basketball team do some very coordinated play or two dancers that are improvising.

Is that...

able to be reduced entirely to the skilled embodied performance of individual bodies or is there a way in which we could talk about a group embodying skillful performance especially because so many performances i mean except for what stand-up comedy a few other things they're a group and then even those individual performances are in feedback sometimes with a group it's just different roles


SPEAKER_00:
That's a good point, actually.

I mean, I think that's really the exciting field of practice that's going to be growing over the next while.

And I sense that it's almost impossible to get that from a snapshot.

You have to have something that's been progressing over time to get, or let's just say, I don't know whether that's true, but I sense that there's more use in understanding how things change over time and getting the dynamics than there is trying to analyze a snapshot.


SPEAKER_02:
Dave, if you have any comments, you can unmute and I'll see it.

Or Dean, any sort of just opening thoughts?

How does this .2 meet you today?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I'm going to come at it from a little different angle.

So I think that word between is a huge, it's the thing that befuddles us, and yet it's the thing that we

probably want to know the most about.

And in this idea of embodied skillful performance, I was going to actually ask

the author some questions around how she relates it back to sort of the parts of the brain that resolve these problems.

So is it a spatial relationship thing like what the hippocampus tends to provide us some insight on or is it a caudate nucleus thing which says that we sequence everything out and we turn left, we turn right, we release the ball

And I was just curious about which, because those two things work, but when one is on, the other one is off.

There's kind of a binary relationship between those two parts of the brain.

And so I wanted to kind of figure out how that toggling back and forth is part of this skill that we are witnessing.


SPEAKER_02:
nice point there's um the more cognitively driven versus almost the more bodily driven and then that handoff is where we see skillful performance and that's where we see choking it's where we see all these dynamics between cognitive processes and action processes okay we see another dave dave if you can

If you want to give any thoughts, just feel free.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll just listen in, thanks.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Right on.

That's the real OG way to listen in, in the Jitsi, rather than in the live stream.

um yeah so we'll see who else joins in today but that's a great question about the brain pieces and then i always think about other species like if insects can have embodied action and that seems pretty fair to say can they have skillful action and how would we know and then if they do

the layout of their brain and body is so different that it wouldn't map on, you know, they don't have a hippocampus, they don't have a prefrontal cortex, they have other brain regions.

So we don't need to get too locked into one implementation of these processes based upon human neuroanatomy when we know that there's other neuroanatomies that can

deploy similar processes.

So it helps us keep an open mind to the multiple realizations of active inference or of embodied skillful performance because of just the diversity of evolutionary systems.

Let's take an overview at the roadmap.

This paper has a form that we've seen several times before, which is in the first half,

taking some non-active inference body of research.

So in this case, it's skillful performance and optimal motor control theory and investigating with a critical lens this previous body of research to understand what is it really saying or what are the assumptions?

So in this case, there's this instructionist assumption implicitly or explicitly that's drawn out

through the exploration of previous approaches to skillful performance and specifically the motor representations and motor commands that are implicit in optimal motor control theory.

So that's part one.

Part two goes from optimal control to predictive coding and active inference.

And last time we talked a little bit about similarities and differences as you go from optimal motor control to predictive processing to active inference, what is generalized as you move from A to B to C, what is different, what kinds of issues might you sidestep or introduce.

And then in the last sections of the paper, motor control is positively reframed as this interactive sensory motor engagement with the world, which puts us very squarely in the domain of active inference, rather than in the instructionist domain of optimal motor control theory.

Greetings, Blue.

So that's kind of a general pattern that we've seen before, where the first third of the paper is a background on previous approaches,

a critical lens the second approach shows some sort of a transition from theory a to b to c and then by the third part there's a positive positivist argument as to why active inference is more in line with how things are or might be more useful uh stephen go ahead


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, further to our conversation earlier, I think this actually, this showing the instructionist and then the interactive approach is really useful to sort of have a plausible way for affect and social dynamics to interplay with action.

Because when it's under an instructionist model,

it is kind of hard to imagine how that kind of mechanical, almost message-passing type of approach can integrate into our sort of social dynamics, whereas the interactionist approach does give that.

So I think that's quite good.

It can frighten people off because it brings in this other philosophical piece, which I think a lot of people would like running away from at first, but actually it does offer a more humanizing or biological way to engage.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Let's just go there.

Blue, of course, raise your hand anytime you want to add something.

But this instructionism versus interactionism, I think, is a big piece that we'll walk away from this 23 with.

It's something that we can take on in the case of embodied skillful performance, but I think we're going to be able to apply it to education.

We're going to be able to apply it to team collaboration.

And so we can definitely return to this distinction between instructionism and interactionism.

So, Stephen, just from your experience with drama or other kinds of work,

Do you think people are, how do people implicitly use instructionism versus interactionism or what kinds of scenarios support or constrain instructionism versus allow for interactions to emerge?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, I think what tends to happen is in the models that people tend to use, they're kind of either in one camp or another.

So mostly, it's almost implicit that there's some sort of interactive stroke flow.

It probably goes even further.

It's sort of some sort of flow in the performance arts world.

They talk about flow and ease and that type of thing.

And what's also interesting is, I know they talk about this in the Michael Chekhov acting approach, is there's always this battle between ease and form.

So a dancer gets more form, they get more technique, they get more proficient at their technique, but they might lose their ease that you have as a beginner.

So you're forever trying to add more technique without becoming this kind of rigid automaton, you know?

So I think there's that kind of side to it, and that whole area, they just go off, and it just takes care of itself, but it becomes a little bit...

of a silo in a way.

And then you've got people working in more straight activity theory, Vykovsky, kind of much more like what activity happened when.

And that, they are also in a bit of a silo.

So I think that you tend to find that

And different areas, they are a little bit siloed in their approaches to sort of get around some of these challenges.

So I think that the way of trying to break beyond what you can analyze, which often you have to look at instructionally because you kind of have to break down things into steps.

But that doesn't mean you need to keep it in a stepwise form in terms of how we understand what people really do.

So there's this kind of, I think there's this kind of gap that this will help to make plausible.


SPEAKER_02:
Interesting there how we capture the utility and the apparent advantages of instructionism.

Some of them are written here, like the ability to separate different instructions.

That seems pretty important.

If you say, well, how am I going to cook this multi-stage dish?

And someone just says, you know, here's all the ingredients and here's all the behaviors, but I'm not going to tell you what order to do what in.

If we can't separate and sequence events,

then it's going to be hard to carry out a performance correctly.

You can't just switch the order of musical notes and the sheet music.

You can't just do things in a different order.

So how do we get some of the features that we're looking for, like separability and modularity, and take it into a fully interactionist framework?

One distinction there that the authors raise is like strong versus weak instructionism.

And they'll...

end up continuing that both of these forms have similar underpinnings, but there's sort of a continuum between thinking that the instructionism is completely its own neural representationism.

It's kind of like a Mott and Bailey type argument.

This is the strong instructionism thinking that it's totally just the neural representations that are entirely specifying on their own the movements that have to be performed

versus a more dynamical coupling version of instructionisms.

So that'd be like when you're tapping the gas, it's like an instruction to the engine, but it's not the entire go faster cue given the background of ecologically normal processes that enable them to play this role.

So that's kind of interesting.

Blue, any sort of overarching thoughts or anywhere you think it'd be fun to jump in?


SPEAKER_01:
Now I'm just trying to figure out where I'm at still.


SPEAKER_02:
Indeed.

Well, there'll be a few other places, like a few other notes that we want to discuss.

Dean mentioned one thing.

Maybe we can even have a .3 and find out what a .3 would mean or a .21 or something like that, .21.

So one piece was about the neural elements because in the figures...

we do see brains.

However, these are quite schematic.

It's not saying that these are the brain regions where these types of things happen, which can be a little ambiguous because it's not actually an anatomical representation, yet it's superimposed on top of a brain.

Okay, so one piece we wrote down was about the neural.

And I think there was a few, yeah, oh yeah, Stephen, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just tying this, as you mentioned about the streak, the weak and strong, it's kind of interesting because that's kind of trying to give this scientific feel, but it doesn't feel very satisfactory to try and have to say it in terms of weak and strong because you kind of think, well, what does that really mean and how does it shift between the two?

I mean, I can understand what is being said, but it gets into this kind of...

fuzzy version of instructionism so i think that kind of sets up some of these questions that as soon as you move away from a strong instructionism um it becomes harder to hold it together using the word instructionism so i think that's it's quite a good illustration of that because it's sort of unraveled you can see how the second paragraph's a lot longer than the first one basically um


SPEAKER_02:
Yep, great point.

And it's also a common approach to basically rigorous philosophical argument.

Instead of making an argument against the total category, you introduce a distinction in the category.

And then you might find that either one of those categories has some feature that the other one doesn't.

You know, instead of being against all wars, well, there's the good ones and there's the bad ones.

And then here's my distinction for just the bad ones.

Or it could be that by making that distinction, you then can say, actually, this holds true for both of these categories or subcategories.

And so that's how I've made my claim against all X is by first breaking it down.

And then they do, again, find that there of course are differences between these two forms of instructionism, but that they end up taking on some of the same assumptions.

Cool.

There's probably a few other pieces we can explore.

This is the section in the paper that I'm sharing on the screen that says the formulation of sensory motor control in terms of optimal motor control theory heavily hinges on two different but highly interconnected assumptions.

So let's see what the assumptions are because it's probable that active inference is going to be contrasting or doing something different.

So one is the central specification of descending motor commands.

and their efferent copies in the form of detailed low-level instructions for control of the motor plant specified in terms of an intrinsic frame of reference, i.e.

extension and contraction of muscle fibers.

So that's that instructionism.

And then two, a separation of forward and inverse models operating on complementary aspects of action planning and executionism.

So the first piece is that instructionism that what's being sent descending or towards the body are instructions.

And the second piece is a separation of the forward and the inverse models operating on complimentary aspects of action planning and execution.

So the forward model is like sort of a planning model.

And then the execution is like, okay, given what I planned,

how am I going to execute that?

And those are two different streams in optimal motor control.

And so we've been talking about how interactionism, we can explore how Active Inference deploys interactionism, but in interactionism, we have a contrast with the instructionist point one,

And then through a unified generative model in active inference and the reduction of uncertainty in a unified generative model, we're going to move beyond this separation of these two forward and inverse models.

Stephen, and then anyone else or any questions in the live chat?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, this is quite helpful.

It gives that realization that optimal

motor control theory could it can be very precise you can imagine some making a robot because you can measure everything you've got access to all the data and you could make something within like a thousandth of a millimeter precision which humans or animals can't do but it

it does have a bit of a limitation in terms of being able to integrate.

And I think that, I don't know if you've seen any of the papers around the idea of fields being around the robot's joints.

So have like a field around the hand, a field around the, and just move into the field rather than trying to work out what the actual must, what the actual joints should do.

And they, they out-competed the,

other robots within like two or three months so this same idea of working with some sort of more fuzzy dynamical build actually and just working out what works most efficiently or best even though you're probably adding a lot more fuzziness into the actual understanding of the measurements actually has a lot of benefits in terms of learning how to do something quickly


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I think there'll be a few more cool points to return to on this notion of field, but I think it's also helpful here to look at how they distinguish the forward and the inverse models.

So here, a forward model takes a system from an intrinsic to an extrinsic frame, predicting the effects of different movements using musculoskeletal plans specified by neural activity.

So again, that's that instructionism.

That's because we're in the optimal motor control.

So forward model is basically plans that can be cognitive into implementations.

That's the translation into motor commands and their consequences.

On the other hand, an inverse model builds motor commands by inverting the causal change.

So first, that inverse model leverages a value function of states.

This is where we get the inoptimal motor control, the non-negotiable introduction of value as a central heuristic.

States have to be assigned a value because value is what's used to determine which plans to select.

And that leveraged on the value function is used to form a mapping from desired target states, which again is built into active inference in a sense through the preference over certain types of states, but the desired target state has to be specified in a slightly different way as an actual preferred state rather than over a preferences over states in this optimal motor control framework.

that's in the coordinate system based upon the external consequences of movements so i want my my arm to be at a 90 degree angle and then that is translated or it's mapped to a set of intrinsic coordinates in the space of muscle fiber activations like my arm is at a greater than 90 degree angle so that needs to map to activation of bicep firing patterns so that the arm can contract so that the angle is smaller

And that's why frameworks based upon optimal motor control are sometimes characterized in terms of force control because all the motor commands specify is muscle forces and joint torques.

So that's kind of the macro to micro mapping is we have preferred states.

And the question is there's so many degrees of freedom with the joints.

So how do we go from potentially a broad set of preferred states or acceptable states

into a specific pattern of muscular activations so how do you go from make your hand just rest where it's comfortable which is a relatively broad

um sort of plateau of accessible states into a position that each joint is going to be at equilibrium with and the two of these assumptions that we've been exploring here so again one the instructionism and two the separation of forward and inverse model that architecture

induces the assumption or rests on the assumption that value valuable States is what causes action.

And that's what that first in 2011 paper introduced is sort of flipped that on its head, which is that, well, um,

In models from OMCT, sequences of action are selected according to the value function of their states.

So value is something that's cognitive and then induces action, but that gets sort of flipped in the 2011 perspective because value is a function of the states, not a cause of them.

So, yeah.

as written here, value is an attribute of states that are caused by movement.

It's a consequence, not a cause.

And when we get

loops you know which one's a cause of which something that's locally a causes b but then you pull back a level and maybe the relationship can also be seen as sort of the other direction or maybe with feedback systems or embodied systems we move beyond just any single linear framing of what causes what

But regardless of the direction or whether value is an attribute of states or it's a consequence or it's a cause,

The point is, there still is this central value parameter in optimal motor control theory, and that value parameter, which is familiar to reinforcement learning, like learning preferable states based upon their predicted value, that's something that we're going to be able to build on in active inference by pursuing not just value, but also allowing for reduction of uncertainty in a generative model

which can include pragmatic or value-driven elements but also elements that include curiosity like drives steven and then anyone else and this ties in with casper hess work with affect you could imagine that the affective states are kind of generated


SPEAKER_00:
on the fly at different scales so as you start to move maybe slowly as you practice you see that these value states are kind of almost revealed and not necessarily available and then maybe there's a state for once the whole action is complete and that gives you you know enter that value state which maybe only appears

as that degree of surprise all is realized.

And it's always gonna be slightly different each time you do something.

So this is quite cool.


SPEAKER_02:
I've moved here to that kind of vector field representation of the difference between value only,

learning and performance here's our robot who's only interested in kind of taking a ruler putting it on the hill and then going in the direction of the ruler going uphill that's the sort of scalar approach to pursuing peaks in contrast we have that peak climbing or hill climbing element

in active inference as that irrotational or longitudinal current but we also get this solenoidal element so i'm wondering talking to people about performance for example or training in some way how would it be different to promote this sort of value and equi-value flow model rather than a comparative reward driven model like if

A learner is constantly assessing whether it's a multiple choice test or whether it's baseball pitching or something like that.

If a learner is always assessing the value of states and everything is framed as value maximization and you're going to want to be doing accurate states, you want to be getting your pitches more accurate because more accurate is more rewarding.

I'm just wondering how it changes training or the experience of practice to know that there's times when one is pursuing value or that in the long range, pursuit of value can be achieved through this rotational or exploratory element.

Blue, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_01:
So just talking about pitching specifically, like, yeah, you can, you know, hit the bullseye, right?

If you're going to pitch, you know, pitch a ball, you can hit the bullseye, you can hit the target, get it right over home plate.

But like, you never explore, like, what about like spinning the ball?

What effect will like different spins that you put on the ball have on, you know, the way that the batter hits it?

So like the accuracy versus like,

the finesse of it and i think about that in terms of dance also like if you're not if you don't explore like you know what it feels like like if you're only trying to accurately make a movement you're never exploring like the finesse element of it so there's no like room for perfection or like ultimate mastery i think


SPEAKER_02:
And where does skill become mastery?

It's sort of like, at least in chess, it's the masters who appear to challenge some of the basic rules.

Like they don't castle early because there's some deeper plan or a jazz musician who moves beyond the framework of regular timing to introduce some other element.

So that play element becomes especially important.

It's almost like if you never learn how to do it,

correctly or normatively, you can't throw the baseball.

So you gotta get it over the plate.

But then, the mastery level, after performance has been demonstrated in a sense, involves

inventing a new way to pitch like there's, you know, a fraction of baseball pitchers who throw sidearm or throw knuckleball, all these different sort of unconventional approaches that aren't the value function that they learned initially, or maybe it was their biomechanics.

And that was the value function that worked for them.

And some other value function just wouldn't have worked with their body and brain, Steven, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thinking from the perspective of coaching, because my supervisor works a lot with systemic coaching and performance coaching, is this becomes a more unifying approach.

It might be for specific things.

Optimal control theory is quite useful for just...

unpacking something but if you want to look at performance coaching more broadly or developmental coaching more broadly and how they relate this could be useful and i'm just thinking about christian erickson the you know the soccer player i don't know if you heard he collapsed during the euros and his heart stopped and all the team were around him trying to and then they had to play the game in about an hour's time now

their ability to perform was going to be very hard.

It's not a performance coaching question at that point.

There's these other dynamics going on.

And I think that this ability for active inference to at least unify how regimes can change and how it could be the environment, the system, the emotions, all these things are quite useful.

Thanks, Dean.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Yeah, I appreciate what you're saying there, Stephen.

I am.

Aside from the from the step by step part that I think the caudate nucleus.

tends to perform when we're trying to climb that little mountain there robotically.

There's another factor I think that's kind of interesting, and that's if it's embodied in its skill, there's probably three kinds of math at play.

There's materialization, the how, sort of the engineering of it.

There's the what's in, what's out, what's supliferous and what needs to be

an element within the performance.

And then I think what this paper does in the interactions piece is it brings the probably into the conversation.

And I think you need all three kinds of calculations in order to be able to get a real grip on what's going on.

Maybe not an optimal grip, at least a fuzzy grip on what to do next.

I think if you only have two of those elements,

you've got the perfect conditions for an instrumentalist approach when you add the, probably whether it's Erickson, um,

What did he text or email all of his teammates and said, go finish the game.

We got to finish this game.

And I think Stephen's right.

You can give an instruction to your teammates and say, I'm fine, but you just had a cardiac arrest.

And we probably aren't going to be able to wipe that from our memory in that moment.

And so it's a little bit more complicated when we add probably.

But I think we need probably in order for it to be interactionist.


SPEAKER_02:
So that team, like in the middle of the game, the personnel of the team changed.

In the individual story of motor control, it's like, but that's not between you and the soccer ball.

So why should it change performance?

But when we have the deep generative model of the individual that includes affect, that's one way to get to the loss of a teammate influencing performance.

And the second way would be to actually genuinely allow teams to be skillful performers.

in the sense that there's a distributed cognitive process on the team just like there is in the body and so they actually changed and whoever steps into that person's position on the field they're going to have a different approach so it'd be like switching out you know one arm for another arm or one forager nest mate for another nest mate it's going to change the emergent properties of the group

in a way that's an explanation at the group level rather than requiring to come back to just the optimal motor control, value-driven, instruction-guided of a body.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just the probably is like what gives active inference its power, right?

Like probably if I don't eat breakfast, I'm going to collapse in the middle of a field, you know, or playing a game or whatever.

So when you have that probably, it allows you to guide all of your actions toward a given intention, I think.

Thanks, Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and I also think when probably, because probably is often, it's still in that value, my world, you know, probably I will get this gain or that gain.

And when the word uncertainty is put in, uncertainty is a much scarier word than probability, right?

Because it's like, it has that risk component.

So it's really interesting that you say that we tend to say probably everything will be okay, but active influence is like, you don't know.

It's all unknown to some extent.


SPEAKER_02:
Here's another nice piece from the paper that I think can continue this discussion about probability and maybe also how active inference reframes it.

So the physics of flow embedded in active inference.

Now...

it's an ongoing discussion exactly the formalisms that get us to a physics of information flow on sense cognition and action so other live streams other days other years but let's just roll with this physics of flow

It's accounting for sensory motor behavior to show that motion in a biologically realistic state space irreducibly includes two orthogonal kinds of motion, the irrotational and the solenoidal component.

So that's what we were looking at here.

Just this is a paragraph that's representing this piece.

Instead of just value only, we have value and flow.

And again, this is key to reiterate because it's something that isn't included in reward scalar representations.

So the former, the first one, the curl-free, is what allows the flow to climb a gradient towards more valuable or probable states.

Now that's one of the head scratchers in active inference that preferred states are likely states.

under an optimistic deep generative model and that is the alignment that allows us to reduce uncertainty and by way of reducing uncertainty achieve our target outcomes

And so when we align the deep generative model in an optimistic way, such that we believe that likely states are preferred ones, that it's likely that tomorrow I'll have a regular body temperature, it's likely that tomorrow I'll be in this preferred body position, then we actually get to pursue value as a consequence of reducing uncertainty.

There's more to say on this, but Dean, go for it, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, and I think, Daniel, what that points out is that there's a dependency for people who want to introduce statistical propositions to what's the underlying situation that we're observing.

There's a dependency on the derivative math and the accounting math.

You can't figure out what probably is without figuring out how and what and having a sense of

confidence around what, how and what are.

So I don't think it's, it isn't just the introduction of active inference.

Active inference is also wholly dependent on a strong foundation in terms of really being able to get from priors

through that hidden state.

And how do we do that?

We have to have derivatives and we have to have accounts.

So I think there's a real codependency back to the between comment that Steven brought up earlier.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that idea of

things going through cycles i think i'm not going to go into ergodicity again but you know it often comes up is that's from what i'm understanding is is pretty much not present in optimal motor control theory because it's it's about you go there and then now you have a vector and that vector is a thing and that thing gets optimized but you never have that thing i think like

Dean was saying, there's that kind of in-between.

And you're kind of holding that in-between.

But that only makes sense if you keep revisiting the in-between.

You need to have ergodicity of whatever.

I mean, that's an open question, again, for another day.

But there's some way that you're revisiting this understanding.

Because otherwise, you've got no way to make any sort of information


SPEAKER_02:
gain or information extraction unless you have a revisiting to compare interesting um and it's one of the key pieces again that we reduce our uncertainty and achieve preferred states through that process i'm just imagining you know something from organic chemistry it's like you want to study up

Cram for your final at OChem, you want to pass.

So are you going to take a reinforcement learning perspective or an active inference perspective?

Well, the reinforcement learning perspective is like saying you'll get the big reward when you pass.

So what's the most rewarding problem that we should be solving?

Or what's the most rewarding chapter to review?

But you don't know because if you knew, then you'd pass OChem.

So you're kind of right back at square zero with value because you framed learning as a value question.

in contrast the active inference learner would be like oh sure my preference is to pass how am i going to reduce my uncertainty about the critical path of passing well let's i haven't even opened the textbook let's go to the first table of contents or something like that like reduction of uncertainty gives a first step

then it even allows for okay maybe that wasn't even the right first step or maybe that was a good two-step path and now i'm ready to go a different way but i'm trying to reduce my uncertainty about how to get to what i prefer which is passing rather than i've a priori valued this future state

And now I'm going to back propagate value at every single step of the line.

And then I'm going to stress myself out if this specific chapter isn't maximally rewarding because everything again has to get reduced to value in this

value is everything framework but in the uncertainty reduction framework we see sort of this mist of uncertainty and then regularities and especially dependable ones emerge out of that and so we're planning amidst uncertainty with preferences in mind trying to figure out what to do that's planning as inference amidst uncertainty

which is just a world apart from planning to maximize value through time, given, you know, what model again of how value is assigned?

It's just a recursive question and value learning doesn't give us that higher level answer for how we should actually go about planning to obtain values, let alone critiquing value as a pervasive framework, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
actually that's a very interesting talk about organic chemistry experiences at university that i had an absolute nightmare on my organic chemistry i i might i've given my textbook to someone i've got behind on the organic side and um it was this like two inch thick textbook on organic chemistry and every time you go into it it's got so many words it's long names and all of this

And it was going on, and it was really interesting because we had this class with a new professor.

And he got there, and he got a few people to go up to the board.

And it became clear that absolutely no one knew the organic chemistry, and no one seemed to pick up on this.

So we were now in the second year.

No one knew what they were doing.

I think it was even the third year.

And he said he recommended a little thin exercise book.

with exercises, not on all the different chemical reactions and all the structures, just the key reactions, and just to go through these exercises in this thin book.

And basically, that got me through the exam and got me on track.

So going for the big book and the...

the memorizing and the optimal control.

It was just work out the five key types of reaction and do the exercises.

And I think that speaks to what you were talking about there.

Which ways do the electrons move?

And that suddenly really, really changed everything.


SPEAKER_02:
There's also some fun drilling happening, of course, all around me.

Welcome back.

Dave, so this section right here, it's a nice challenge.

It increases the difficulty of speaking, but it's fun.

This is a challenge for other frameworks.

This idea that the two flows together provide a richer framework for expressing skillfulness as a process whose characteristic go beyond a simple gradient of value accuracy.

So we saw that reward is enough paper.

Recently, some participants at our lab were kind of curious about writing a response because that's the whole argument is they said, hey, reward is enough.

The kernel can be reward, and that's how you get all of these intelligent behaviors, provided that you have these second level tweaks on the model or these bolted on modules.

And then the contention of the authors here

is that value functions and indeed any motor scheme based upon functions that return scalars are not up to the task of modeling the variety of skillful acts describing human behavior any kind of behavior just human because by construction they cannot account for the solenoidal aspect of flow so that that's pretty interesting that when we have to bottleneck into a single number

we lose a lot of the expressivity that allows for explore and exploit behavior to almost coexist because we're collapsing onto a number line.

So there's extremely limited availability for, you know, what do you want for your main dish and your side dish?

And you just say seven.

you can't express two things with just one number, but if you could say, you know, seven and three, you could express something that's more in a two dimensional space.

Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
So I think you bring up an interesting point about any behavior or just human behavior.

And I think about, you know, there's like dolphins that use tools, right.

To crack open like fish and, or to crack open, not the fish, but the,

um the sea urchins right so there's dolphins that use tools for eating and then there's dolphins that don't and and so is there and like this is like a hereditary like it's it's a an example of cultural evolution in dolphins actually so it's you know it's hereditary but only because it's passed on through learning and social learning right so

You know, you bring up, and then we saw the motor plant, right?

Like the motorized plant.

Like, does the plant learn where the, like, how, like, skillful performance?

I mean, is this a skillful performance on the part of the plant?

So it's a really interesting question whether, you know, I mean, we think about active inference as applying to all non-equilibrium steady state systems, but...

does this maybe apply only in the human sense of movement?

Or what about like tribes of humans?

Like what about like in a nomadic kind of population, would this apply there also?


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Here's another nice piece in this section that I think will be useful for us to learn about.

So technically, it's easier to read when it's already been written when you're getting the drilling experience.

That's when it's the hardest to skillfully improvise, but reading is a little easier.

Technically, active inference extends popular predictive coding models used in neuroscience where perception

Critical only perception is cast in terms of prediction error minimization.

So that's the classic Rao and Ballard 99 paper.

That's sort of a mega citation and there's a huge amount of subsequent work and predictive processing or predictive coding is just looking at the relationship from sense

to updating of a generative model of sense.

So it's a signal processing framework, and this is something I know that Dave is a big fan of, OCNOT's drills and hammers.

I know that Dave is a fan of talking about the signal processing and the audio processing roots of active inference.

So this is just on the inbound, just from sensory information to estimates of that generative model of that generative process of the sensory data.

The active inference framework extends this account of predictive processing to model motor control and explains action selection by appealing to the minimization of divergence between predicted sensory data and actual sensory data.

So here we have the exact same divergence minimization.

It will sound better on the live stream, my Jitsi colleagues, don't worry.

It's the same divergence that's being minimized, which is the difference between observed and expected sensory data.

So in predictive processing, it's about sense and perceiving sense, and so you want to minimize the divergence between what sensory data you expect and what you're actually getting.

But Active Inference adds planning as inference into the loop

and explains action selection also in terms of the exact same divergence goal of predictive processing which is again to have your observed sensory outcomes come into line with your expected sensory outcomes dean yeah i i one of the things i used to


SPEAKER_03:
Share with people is, so today I'm wearing my murder of crows t-shirt because I used to study a lot of corvid behavior.

And even though I, there's still some question as to what sort of verbal cues, what instructions corvids are able to share because they are social animals and they are problem solvers.

But you don't have one corvid standing there

to the side as another corvid solves a problem, giving them instructions.

So I think it's kind of interesting when we're looking at this behavior question, whether we're the only species that are actively inferring.

Because I think that there are other species out there that you could make a case that they are doing that probably form of questioning and answering as well.

So yeah, it can be tools.

It can be based on social constructs.

It can be based on caching, so deep memory.

And again, there's a dependency, I think, for behavior that uses active inference to also have some grounding in how and what.

So I don't think that active inference in and of itself will allow us to minimize anything unless we have the derivative and the accounts.

So I think it's a virtuous triad here.

But I think what this paper is trying to do is get away from the idea that all problems can be solved with only two kinds of math.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

Thank you.

Steven?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah further to that point around you know what humans do or animals do in general is you could say optimal control approaches maybe it's only really humans that can apply that extra level on top as this kind of constraining kind of deductive

idea and every other organism is really working with this kind of flow.

I mean, if you see a squirrel trying to run up a tree and between trees and chase another squirrel around the trees, it's quite phenomenal just how agile they are and the speed they can work at.

And so there's some sort of skillful performance that they've got.

So there's this interesting thing whereby you've got this

We see optimal control as more straightforward, but it basically, it's almost really optimal control just isn't

implementable in practical terms it's almost it's a it's a what you could say it's a non-ergotic deductive extra that humans bring to the table to explain the mechanical world that they're bringing to bear in some way so it's kind of interesting it just happens to be that was the first explanation we had for this type of stuff


SPEAKER_02:
Nice, so let's think about what active inference is and then see who might be doing it or what might be doing it.

So again, the core idea is that rather than selecting commands, the organism in active inference is inferring what it must or should be doing under this same imperative of predictive coding, which is to minimize the relationship, minimize the divergence between observed and expected outcomes through time.

Crucially, this brings perception and action together in the same functional profile.

We have them on a current sort of trading market almost, like we can reduce our uncertainty through updating our model and we reduce our uncertainty through action.

So updating and action or action and inference are put on common footing.

And it also explains some, so this is the sort of computationalist or algorithmic level is we're making a sensory motor model that doesn't just have arrows connecting pieces ad hoc and say, look, they're connected because I drew a picture.

We're bringing perception and action together in a common modeling framework.

And also on the neurological, it explains some of the similarities between the functions of sensory and motor cortices.

So that speaks to Dean's points earlier and to a lot of these brain regions that might have been discovered or initially characterized as having a more cognitive or a more motor role, but then it's shown that they play other roles.

So, you know, cue the endless clickbait.

Oh, this brain region associated with this also does that.

Should that be surprising?

Should that be salient?

Or should we have another view where that is to be expected?

Now, while this moved from a problem of control, so optimal motor control,

That's the action side.

And then there's, so pure action side, optimal motor control.

Tends to not concern itself too much with uncertainty of measurement or deep generative models.

And then you have the pure sensory processing side.

That's kind of predictive processing.

This move from a problem of control to one in inference, in terms of active inference, does not make the problem mathematically easier in and of itself, but it offers a different model of skilled action which respects the neurophysiological evidence.

So in other words, we're taking the sort of problem of going from sense data to a generative model, the predictive processing model, and then the forward model from internal states to action selection.

And it's easier to, of course, subset to just one of those directions and say that one has a tractable model.

But active inference is combining both directions or integrating across these two different ways of like looking at sense and action and saying, let's have one model of sense and action with a common functional profile as they describe it here.

Which systems have it slash do it?

That's the realism question.

And the instrumentalism question is, which systems can we model as if they're doing this?

So I think that the instrumentalism question, which as always, it's about us, so it's easier to answer, is the kinds of systems that have sensory motor input output dynamics.

So everything from a self-driving car

to different kinds of animals, we could model as if they were getting input generative model output.

So the things that people model with OODA or that classical sandwich of cognition, those are the kinds of systems that are apt to be modeled with active inference.

the kinds of things that people were modeling with optimal control, going from the model to action, and the kinds of systems that people were modeling with predictive processing from sensory inputs to generative model, both of those and ones that especially are doing both, those are some of the most amenable systems for active inference.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
I was wondering, this idea of functional profile, I haven't heard that one before.

It might be another one to think on the ontology that's being talked about.

How have you seen that being used anywhere else in terms of active inference, functional profile?


SPEAKER_02:
Good question.

It doesn't seem like it's used anywhere else in this paper, and I don't offhand recall

what other papers it might have been used in, but that's a great point and something to ask about.

I think the notion of just function is a key one to follow, and what... How do we follow function?

Yeah, go ahead, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I suppose because this is talking about

action skillful performance function starts to it's thinking about functional as in how to achieve an action of skillful performance so maybe that's how it comes in here whereas a lot of some of the other papers there's no moving parts so to speak it's all information based in in terms of um but i think it's it's interesting in terms of

um what that does or what it's trying to do is it's another way of trying to speak to something which is a bit bigger you know that's one thing i've noticed that influence normally things are trying to define what everything is this one it gives these it gives these pullbacks

They're like, okay, we've got a functional profile now that allows us to do X, Y, Z. But like I say, it does provide that challenge of trying to fit that into these other pullbacks that we seem to keep finding appearing, like the effective charge that came up in one.

And so, yeah, I think that's kind of an interesting thing

a question about how that fits in with other types of models or ways of translating between spaces or frameworks.


SPEAKER_02:
Dean, thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So I wonder, let's just take that to its next logical place.

So let's start with a functional profile.

not necessarily work back, but is there some way for us to be able to identify what's in that profile that would allow for active inference and should we, is that something that, is that dangerous or is that legitimate?


SPEAKER_02:
Nice question.

Here's a little bit where they're getting at this realism and instrumentalism discussion.

so even some of the most forthright defenders of the active inference framework assemble have backed away from making such strongly realist claims about the causally efficacious character of generative model so here is where we see um uh hardcore realism so it's nice you know and as we work towards the terms and the ontology how can we classify different senses or uses of terms

Fristen 2013 has advanced the view that an agent does not have a model of its world, it is a model.

Now, that's an interesting claim, but the authors bring this up by also qualifying Fristen's use of model from a different paper and saying, crucially, if we accept the generative models of the active inference frameworks,

not sure if this is the if they're saying you know usually it's framework but will there be multiple active inference frameworks in line with these proposals we must embrace the idea that generative models are causal in the sense of an agent's inactive attunement with the world rather than part of the causal efficacious machinery used by an agent so that's an interesting claim blue


SPEAKER_01:
So I was thinking about, like, you know, that an agent doesn't have a model of the world, but it is a model.

And, like, I think about that in terms of people that have traumatic brain injury and then have, like...

dramatic amnesia like can't remember how to walk or talk or eat and have to like relearn all of these things right so so i think about like if we don't i mean in that case it seems like the model like you have a model and then you suddenly don't have a model but it's like if you are a model

are you suddenly not a model or is your, is that like a temporal disruption?

I don't know.

Like, so that, that to me, I mean, and this is the instrumentalist realist debate I realize, but where do you, you know, if you are a model, is it like a temporal disruption and suddenly you have to start over or what does that, that look like in those circumstances?

Nice question, Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

I mean, in a way, I suppose when someone has to relearn, um,

the fact that they are at some level their body is part of being that model that gives them access to either some priors or that they call it the morphological computing capacity the body's capacity to then form those priors because um you know if if however certain parts of the body are

like with a stroke, that can be kind of challenging because that maybe the actual way the body moves is compromised.

Therefore, the ability to use it to recreate is diminished.

I mean, the question of how much it's diminished then becomes, I don't know if anyone could quantify that, but it's interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
It's a good point.

An instrumentalist would say, well, yeah, the brain isn't per se doing active inference.

We're going to model it as such.

But then when there is an injury to the physical system, then we say, oh, we're still just modeling it with active inference.

We're just changing our active inference model or has the actual system itself changed?

So will we just always say that even when the system changes in the physical world,

We're just gonna update our model and just always stay in the instrumentalism land?

Or are there times where changes in the world make the instrumentalism verge into realism as if it's actually describing something about the world?

That's gonna be a very delicate walk.

And they are arguing that, again, if we think about these generative models as purely formal and epistemic tools.

So just like a linear regression, you can do a linear regression on GDP or on some other feature.

You can do a t-test in a double-blind study.

It doesn't make the people a t-test.

It doesn't make the GDP a linear model.

So it doesn't make something active inference just to use it in this statistical framework.

that's what's meant by the formal and epistemic tools, then this framework is, we argue, compatible with the sensory motor approach to understanding skilled action.

It's interesting to me because the sensory motor approach to understanding skilled action itself could have a realist or an instrumentalist approach.

The instrumentalist sensory motor would say, I'm not even saying this system has sense and action.

I'm just saying we could model it as if it had sense and action.

whereas the realism of sensory motor would say this system actually does have sensory and active components and also this is another important note the sensory motor view reflects a spectrum of ideas which includes simple open loop sensory motor correlations closed loop

systems regularities given a goal and optimal sets of regularities according to a certain performance metrics these can be understood using the tools of dynamical models of cognition capturing the brain body environment interactions in terms of dynamical systems as opposed to assuming the agent is involved in symbolic computation

it's almost like we see a lot of separation of uh uh the isolation of agency or the delineation of agents with agent in the niche and then the niche itself so we see like agent and external internal states and external states and now when we think about brain and body that's one sort of inseparable dyad and then it is also inseparable from the niche

So how are we going to take all these dynamical systems, which have different physical and causal connections amongst them, brain, body, and niche, and work towards a framework that's actually going to say what we want to say and be useful for what we want to do with these kinds of models, like reducing uncertainty about how organisms will act or designing environments that work for different sorts of agents.

How are we going to do that effectively

and drawing from what we know about dynamical systems more broadly, rather than bring on assumptions such as that the agent is performing symbolic computation, which comes along with the instructionism and the representationism and all these other pieces.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
You know, this is a useful sentence here to show that dynamic that's happening between the kind of participatory sense-making world and the sort of inactivists and the inactive inference world because there's these useful distinctions that have been coming up in inactivism and this participatory sense-making

yet they struggle to give the ways to actually calculate how that comes about outside of these kind of metrics that are looking from the outside of the system so um this this is kind of quite a dance that's going on but it seems to be yielding some good progress for active inference because

They're laying some of the ground for active inference to then see what could be plausibly modeled.

So that's quite useful.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, another point to that, and also what you said earlier.

they're suggesting that active inference is going to extend causally linear accounts of motor control, which tend to focus on the contingency between new actions and their consequences.

So the loop there, which is hardly a loop, it's actually a line, goes from action selection to a new state.

Like I want to grasp the coffee cup.

How am I going to grasp?

I grasped.

That is the domain of many previous models, which is like from some sort of delta that needs to be accomplished to achieving that action.

And that's where the model ends.

Active inference, in fact, proposes a complementary view where predictions of expected proprioceptive states are not just seen as passive reactions to new motor signals, like in the coffee cup grab example, but as also triggering adjustable dynamic reflex arcs to generate new actions.

So here,

instead of starting from action to a new proprioceptive state.

Like, I want to be in a different state, so I want to select an action.

Okay, now my elbow is in the correct predicted proprioceptive state, so we're good to go.

Here, we're starting with the updating of our proprioceptive state, moving to action selection.

inferring our state.

So action and inference, like the two-stroke engine, are now working together in a way where we can pull out a little local stretch that has the same functional features as this linear causative model above

because there's going to be some stretch where that action was performed and where the functional characteristics were carried out but we're embedding that in a

deep temporal model.

And the temporal depth of this model confers a more active anticipatory role to proprioception, now seen in a causally circular model in line with the inactive and embodied approach.

So that's that sort of rummaging around.

That gives an anticipatory and active role for proprioception, not just a state estimate role for proprioception so that it can get relayed to the central headquarters

transmuted and sent back as an instruction it's not like a central intelligence model of action selection it's like an anticipatory deep temporal model that allows sense to be doing something slightly different stephen just a question when it says so it says new action so new action in active inference is the new


SPEAKER_00:
well, guess, I suppose, of what the action state is.

And then the new proprioceptive state, this is the interesting thing with proprioception, is that almost a guess as well, like based on a mix of sort of interoceptive data and...

other data or data, but other ways.

So then is it like a, a different types of guessing or is one of them action ones still being seen as perception in that loop?


SPEAKER_02:
good question i'm sure there's a lot of ways to go about it but one thought is even perception is inference that's predictive coding so our visual perception is clearly a generated inference there's no blind spot there's resolution and color in the periphery where we know the anatomy of the eye doesn't directly support that and so on there's smoothness even though our eyes are constantly circading so

whether it's a proprioceptor or whether it's visual input that is also inferred as part of the deep generative model and so when there is ambiguous visual input or ambiguous proprioceptive input for example

that inactive inference is an opportunity for uncertainty reduction rather than getting out over our skis with then saying whether that's a valuable or an or a less valuable state we actually don't need to judge the value in a scalar framework of ambiguous versus unambiguous states

Because we can just pursue uncertainty reduction and then also cast planning as inference and perception as inference.

Does that make sense, Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, that's really useful.

And I think it's like what you're saying there that also brings in the idea of temporal scale.

So there's with vision and with this, there's what's going on.

below the greater speeds and flux than we can know, like the saccades and the way those saccades then get put together to be this kind of joined up smooth perception of vision.

And

This is this new action, new proprioceptive states.

That's almost kind of at the speed of everyday awareness.

And once things become longer and happen over the period of like 10-minute intervals, you can no longer track that in your working memory or your working phenomenological consciousness.

So this is kind of like the Goldilocks zone in a way where we're able to

when it's talking about new action, new proprioceptive states, it's kind of sitting at a kind of an averaged out perceptual awareness in a way that we can engage.


SPEAKER_02:
Interesting point, Luke.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, Daniel, you already, like, kind of said what I was going to say right after Steven, but proprioception really is the expectation.

Like, where do I expect my body to be?

Where, like, instead of asking, like, where is my leg?

It's, like, where...

is my leg supposed to be, or where do I think my leg actually is?

And you're not always right, right?

Like in the phantom limb case, and even like, you know, if you're stuck with a pin, right?

Like, so, and this is not proprioception, this is just generally like where your nerves are.

So in some places they're very close together and you can infer with great accuracy where exactly the pin was poked into you.

But in some other places in your body, the nerves are more far apart.

And so you can't tell even if the nerve, even if two pins, you poke a pin here, you poke a pin here, you touch the same place.

It's like the pin is here, but you're not always right.

So there's this inference that happens in proprioception as well.


SPEAKER_02:
nice it's like there's um one mode where you have a very high confidence prior of where your arm is located you know it's right by my side let's just say and when there's a high confidence prior data that don't support that prior are only going to move it slightly if someone's very convinced that something is the case they say it's 100 the case that this is this way well then you know there's no point in providing alternative evidence because

they're going to see it in terms of their prior.

So in that case of the phantom limb, it's like there's a high precision prior that the limb is in a certain location.

In fact, it's such a strong prior that sensory data like proprioceptive data that your arm is in a different place or visual data that, for example, somebody no longer has that limb

still doesn't manage to update the experience or the generative model of the limb being there.

So that's one case that we can frame in an active inference way.

And another case would be like, where's my leg?

I have low confidence.

And now instead of framing this just as a estimate that there's an uncertainty on, and then we're going to have to tag a value on, we go from that estimate with uncertainty to planning as inference.

What motor control or what motor behavior is going to reduce uncertainty on the leg?

and sometimes that's like looking at it other times it but that's a motor behavior with the eyes other times it might be doing a motion that then like kind of uh gives us some sensor data so it's kind of like checking your phone and seeing like what notifications are there when you're uncertain maybe sometimes like a shake or something like that it's like just reactivating a bunch of sensors just to pass

Say, oh, yep, we're here just checking in, reducing your uncertainty.

And so the state estimate, even when there is uncertainty about it, we can reduce that uncertainty through action selection rather than just being trapped in a framework of like, okay, I'm not sure where it is.

And now I'm not sure whether that's rewarding or not.

And now I'm not sure which path to take that's going to be most rewarding.

We don't go down the reward rabbit hole.

because there's a deep generative model.

And for evolved slash created or whatever organisms, those priors are fit.

So it's not just like we're dealing with the space of all possible generative models.

These have been evolutionarily selected to be functional in our physical constraints, but underwater or in a different gravity space, it'd be a different set of priors that would need to be learned or utilized.

In our last slide,

he's here what what do you think were some of the big pieces that we leave this 23 strange attractor with as we move forward like what kinds of distinctions or insights here do we want to see how they apply in different settings Dean and then anyone else


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so this is going to be a strange twist, but that's okay.

So I came away from the paper, and I thought about some of the things that Casper did bring up.

Casper Hess did bring up in terms of... So what happens when we talk to instructionists?

Like, instructors are all around us.

There's people that spend a great deal of their life preparing to become an instructor, and we come along and say...

Yeah, that's great.

We know what you do.

But we're going to kind of, I don't know, maybe bring you down a peg because we're going to introduce this other stuff that you weren't asked to sort of train yourself up on.

And I'm not sure if that's a threat or not.

I guess it depends on the personality who the idea is introduced to.

But I'll bring a...

If you know the movies Independence Day and Thelma and Louise, I'm going to bring those into a juxtaposition here.

I think for the instrumentalists,

they don't necessarily see that there can be for the person who is living out the adversarial Greek myth, us against the aliens or us against the, the people who are chasing us down and trying to get our, our convertible back.

Um, there isn't a, there is no set of instructions per se that those people want to follow.

They're living the interaction is state.

Um,

And you can start out with kick the tires and light the fires a la Harry Connick Jr.

and still end up in a rapid deceleration moment a la Susan Sarandon and Gina Davis.

And I think for people who are going to look at this problem in terms of how do we introduce interactionism in a way that doesn't threaten the top-downedness of how most people

most situations where we want people to be able to take up embodied skillful performance without putting them in a situation where they behave like aliens or behave like police chasing somebody down with a helicopter, we're gonna have to sort of, I don't know if it's a slow rolling, I'm not sure exactly what it is,

But those people who are now currently instructors and instructionalists by profession, we're going to have to give them something

so that they don't cling desperately to a model that I think the authors of this paper demonstrated requires a rethink.

I don't think we throw out instructionalism, but I absolutely do think that its place on the top of the mountain, and now all these little robots climbing up it, that has to be reviewed and revisited.

And so, I mean, as a go forward, I don't know how we put people in a place where they're comfortable with that kind of, I don't want to say it's disruptive, but I think it is.

But I think we have to be able to come at this in a way that doesn't make them sort of circle the wagon solenoidally and try to protect something that obviously is up for a bit of evolution before revolution.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice points there.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I like that idea of this challenge of having this mountain that we've kind of ascended and placed these optimal control theories on.

And maybe it's more like there's a mountain

of active inference and there's a there's a little rock a rock structure on the top which is optimal control theory which we're able to sort of utilize on top of that you know but it's uh it's it's a lot more rickety and it's not the the main game in town you know the main game is our intuition our dynamical

balancing of all these different free energy parameters.

But we do, and particularly humans, have this ability to impose this extra shack of tools on the top that we now think is the main game in town.


SPEAKER_02:
nice so to stevens then to dean's point so as to which one's the uh mountain which one's the mole hill which one's the ant hill here friston says optimal control can be cast as active inference with three simplifications

So as we increasingly clarify our understanding of these different models, we'll be able to see which models are nested within one another or are alternate framings of one another or are, you know, more overlapping than different or what are those key distinctions or what are the variables where you can expand it to three and all of a sudden you've gone from model A to B. So remains to be seen.

And by...

him saying that optimal control is a thrice simplified active inference along these three specific domains, it does suggest that the bigger picture might be active inference, and then you get special case optimal motor control with a value function as a...

derivative model within an active inference universe, even if these other models were developed first.

That's often the case that a certain model is introduced and then it's later generalized in several ways so that in the future it's actually seen as a special case model, even though it's actually at one point it was the only game in town.

Certainly for a lot of biology models, that's the case.

And then, Dean, I really like this idea of like

there's a job title called an instructor and if somebody says i'm an instructor in you know organic chemistry or in tango baseball people know what you're talking about so how could interactionism be so broadly participated in that people say yeah i'm an interactor i'm a baseball interactor i'm an ochem interactor

maybe the job would be called that or not.

So how do we, like you were saying, not kind of threaten or disrupt their modes, but give a yes and for what they're working on.

And maybe part of it is that the interactor

It's like we're framing their interactions with their student, let's just say, as a cultural scaffolding of an interaction.

That doesn't make it a symmetric interaction.

It's a culturally scaffolded moment

of Bayesian model updating.

And so it's like, yes, you do give instructions.

That's the verbal term for what you say when you say pull or breathe or okay, slow down.

You can still give instructions.

We're not saying that that is not part of your toolkit, but let's more broadly look at your interactions with this dynamical system as doing what you want to do.

and maybe it'd be enough just to push them to that edge of the hill and just say interactions are a broader way than instructions would you want to reduce everything you do to just barking instructions or sometimes you lead by example other times you show wordlessly you don't need to frame your interactions as instructions recognize that you're just dynamical interacting systems and

this a lot of people are working on a framework that suggests that this is a broader way of thinking about training and might be able to help you on one hand with a high performance elements and on the other hand with accessibility and in making your work more communicable not sure about that of course but just one way to go steven yeah with the idea of roles and how people are


SPEAKER_00:
look at performance in roles, this really comes back to coaching again.

I mentioned that earlier is, you know, coaching came out of the need to supervise therapists and how they could be guided in their path as they were supposedly helping the people that were needy.

They needed guidance.

And that same idea now of coaching rather than

teaching or instructing and um while they have their role as giving the formal documents that you might need and providing the bigger narrative and giving certain tools you know you you act within that you there's this idea of okay what types of developmental or performance interactions can be nurtured and cultivated and i think this actually

really can tie into the kind of pragmatist social constructivist approaches that coaching is trying to work with as in, but it gives it a bit more, um, uh, does actually give it a bit more meat without becoming too complex, which I think previously, a lot of the active influences may be a bit too abstract, but this is starting to show a bridge there.

Why coaching at different levels can and positive psychology more broadly can have a role.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, great.

Thank you, Stephen.

Dean?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, Stephen, I appreciate exactly what you're saying.

I think to get to a place where interactionism is no longer threatening, people have to want or appreciate that you can be a subject matter expert and a prediction matter expert.

And I'm not sure.

I think there maybe are some coaches who are both.

But I sort of transcended that and got into the wayfaring thing because wayfaring imposes a prediction aspect to this.

Now I can't predict for you whether that running jump shot that you make, I can't be in your ear.

I cannot coach you to take that shot in that moment with that much time left on the clock.

In fact, if I do that,

I'm probably adding impediments and I'm actually being an optimal controlist, micromanaging you and whether you make it or not, it's not about me, it's about whether the ball and the basket arrived at some sort of outcome that we both want.

I think that that's part of how we get people to a place where

their dependency on their subject matter expertise doesn't overwhelm the fact that for these performances, there is a predictive element.

And so we have to sort of give that equal billing.

I don't think we have to overbill one or the other.

It's back to the between.

And that's a prediction matter expert.

And again, I don't know if it's a role being a wayfarer,

Because you're in the boat with that other person, right?

It doesn't matter whether you're the one saying, okay, well, I'm getting a sense of the direction of the current right now and the other person's looking up at the stars.

You're working together.

And so everybody brings their expertise.

And I think that only...

that only materializes if we can include something with the subject matter expertise.

Culturally, yes, absolutely.

There's a huge cultural piece to it.

But I think you can be a coach and not necessarily be a wayfarer.

But I think if you're a wayfarer, you have to bring a predictive element into it.

Otherwise, you're not being a wayfarer.


SPEAKER_02:
Interesting that having an integrated way to talk about goal and process and interaction with a niche, interaction with your co-wayfarers.

Just like your example with a movie, is the map app gonna tell you which directions to take?

That's kind of on the instructionist end versus are you on the run?

So anywhere you go, you're just not following instructions.

You're just negotiating sequential interactions and reducing uncertainty in a way that isn't just looking down at the application and seeing which way to turn when.

Nice.


SPEAKER_03:
I'm glad you picked up on the map going out the back end over the trunk of the car.


SPEAKER_02:
Exactly.

Oh, you're reading it?


SPEAKER_03:
Oh, no.


SPEAKER_02:
Right.

Cool.

Well, Stephen, yes?


SPEAKER_00:
Just one question.

Wayfair, is that like a particular sort of approach?

Is it like an orientation-based approach?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, you're on your path, and how are you faring?

How are you feeling?

okay right it's not just way finding it's not just the the discovery piece but it's so how does that make you feel being in that uncertainty space because again if we're going to close the loop discovery will eventually loop back around to recapitulation and then all right we're open systems that are constantly closing these loops so how does that make you feel right got you


SPEAKER_02:
To connect that also to John Boyk and second order science, as well as Bucky Fuller in Trim Tab, when we're the rudder, we need to act in an anticipatory fashion.

So that's kind of like first order cybernetics.

The rudder has to turn before you hit the iceberg.

You gotta find a path, so pathfinding and that whole notion of anticipatory control

comes to the rudder and the trim tab is the little rudder on the rudder so it's anticipating even the anticipatory nature of planning because you have to turn that trim tab even before you turn the rudder and so here we have instead of a sort of mechanical model with recursive levels of rudders we actually have hierarchically nested priors

and so it's a little bit like higher and higher level priors that in one sense when you look at one iceberg and you try to tell a story by backfilling what happens they do act in increasingly anticipatory ways but then when it's seen as just part of the way finding of the ship they're all in a cyclic feedback with each other and it's not like one is really upstream of another but there are certainly pieces doing different things

cool stuff.

Any final thoughts or questions?

I don't see any other questions from the live chat, but another interesting and surprising .2 as usual.

Does anyone have any final comments?

Well...

Great.

We'll look forward to some awesome upcoming streams.

Let's just look at those really fast.

Next week.

the 21st we're going to have our symposium with carl friston so if you've been helping to co-organize this event and develop the questions with us you'll be with us live otherwise we're going to be recording this not live streaming it and then providing the recordings on our youtube channel and then for the second two weeks of june we're going to be um

doing a more technical or statistical paper, Empirical Evaluation of Active Inference in Multi-Armed Bandits.

Then in early July, we're going to have a Fields and Levin paper, Scale-Free Biology, Integrating Evolutionary and Developmental Thinking.

Then don't have any papers for the end of July or beginning of August, but we'll figure out

we want to do there and then we'll be turning to some industrial engineering and some other areas so as always pretty fun journey thanks uh dean blue steven dave for participating live and everyone for watching live and replay we will see you on a future stream
