SPEAKER_00:
All right, hello and welcome.

It's June 28th, 2024.

We're here in quarterly roundtable number two for this year.

Welcome to the Active Inference Institute.

We're a participatory online institute that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

Find us at some of the links here.

This is recorded in an archived livestream.

Please provide feedback so we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll follow video etiquette for livestreams.

And also I'll show this new slide with some nice stable links that will be good signposts and stable ones too.

So we're in our second quarterly roundtable of the year.

There's gonna be three main sections.

First Institute updates, then we'll go to the two organizational units and talk about project scale updates, and then look a little bit towards the second half of 2024.

First though, anyone who wants to unmute and just go ahead and introduce, say hi and anything else you wanna begin with.


SPEAKER_02:
I'll break the ice.

Hi, I'm Blue.

I am really excited at all of the things that the Institute has accomplished this quarter, the fellows program, the partnerships and our upcoming philanthropy.

program, TBD.

More later.


SPEAKER_03:
I'll go next.

I'm John Boyk, one of the new fellows this year.

So excited to be joining the Institute in that capacity.

And I guess there's more later.


SPEAKER_04:
I'm Jean-Francois Cloutier.

I'm also a research fellow, part of that first batch.

And I'll echo John's words and say I'm very excited to be in this role and hope that I will be able to provide some good value.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Andrew.

I'm an intern with the Institute.

I've been involved with a few different projects on and off over the past maybe

year, especially helping facilitate the textbook group whenever I can.

Looking forward to that coming back up in a couple of weeks.

Yeah, looking forward to seeing the rest of the developments with Institute, seeing it grow.


SPEAKER_01:
My name is Holly Grimm and I'm a second member of the scientific advisory board for the second year.

I'm working on the journal project with Alex and right now I'm building a set of utilities in Python and Rust to help transcribe all of Daniel's amazing YouTube videos.

sessions and trying to, so we can eventually create a way of, you know, using retrieval augmented generation, create an LLM agent or, you know, chat with all of these, you know, all of these sessions that have been recorded.

So, thanks.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, let me jump in.

I'm Alex, one of the officers of the Institute, also into journal project and some hours.

So great to see everyone.

Let's have this roundtable.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Okay.

First, going over some Institute scale updates.

on the digital infrastructure side as the stable links are kind of the tip of the iceberg of we'll be looking and have been making some updates to the accessibility and usability of the different services at the institute one of those stable links will take you to ecosystem.activeinference.institute and at this page which again the endpoint may vary

we'll look to develop and really communicate more about what is the Active Inference Institute?

What is the ecosystem?

How are they articulated?

How have they begun and changed through time structurally in all these different ways?

And so one useful piece of information at that resource is kind of like a menu or kind of continents.

of the ecosystem and another exciting announcement is that we'll be doing an updating process on our 2023 institute ecosystem paper so it'll be very fun there will be a lot of multimedia and

collective exploration and refinement of big, impactful visions and things that people are motivated and excited and already working on.

And so to be able to clarify that within the second half of the year in a certain way and also understand what is the role of different functionalities in the ecosystem at the Institute.

So this will be a fun process in the second half of the year that we'll share more information about, but it'll involve

All aspects of the Institute.

Anyone want to add anything?

Here.

okay so thanks to the officers the board of directors who had their second quarterly meeting several weeks ago and to the scientific advisory board who completed their first phase of activities and we'll head into phase two soon at the website there's more information about these positions for now thanks everybody who's been carrying it on this quarter

One of the really exciting new aspects and programs at the Institute in the last few weeks was the introduction of the Research Fellows program.

So perhaps J.F.

and then John, what is it in how you're seeing it and what you'll like to do with it?


SPEAKER_04:
I'll go ahead.

Well, I've been conducting a research project here at the Institute for the last two years, now called the Symbolic Cognitive Robotics Project.

And this project will now continue under the umbrella of a research fellowship.

And what I hope to gain from this is increased participation, involvement, exposure, which will bring in unanticipated rewards.

I'm sure it already started.

And what I hope to provide is, to use Daniel's words, is increased epistemic value of my research and hope to be able to present on a more regular basis my progress and hoping that the Institute will benefit from providing me this increased exposure.


SPEAKER_03:
Again, my name is John Boyk and my effort is focused on cognition in the large group setting.

So how can a group of say 100,000 people or a million people

come together in some online ecosystem to make decisions, discuss events, and perform other cognitive processes.

How does that happen efficiently?

How can everyone have their

rich input heard and the group in my work, the group might be just a group of people focused on some issue or it could be actually something more formal, a formal group like a city or even a nation perhaps one day.

That's what I'm working on.

I hope that will be productive and useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Anna Pereira will

share more about her work in the weeks to come this is an exciting program it's as with all things on a rolling application basis so reach out if you have any questions or to complete the application

That's about individuals who are learning and applying active inference.

Also on the inter-organizational scale, we have begun the partnerships program.

So these are structured relationships between the Institute and other organizations, and we expect and prefer this will look like many things already in the one accepted application, which we'll announce in the coming weeks and several that are in progress.

It's

really interesting and useful even already to explore where people are at and understand how to respectfully and appropriately have a partnership anyone want to add any comments or thoughts on this all right and one

major piece of news from the last several weeks was receiving the 501c3 or USA tax exempt status so the link donate.activeinference.institute is one place that will develop into an on-ramp for providing different kinds of financial support we're definitely looking to learn

and to collaborate and to understand how we can support the sustainability of the Institute and through that support the accessibility and utility of active inference.

Anyone want to make any comments on this?


SPEAKER_02:
I just wanted to thank Fried Frank, who was our

They were our pro bono attorney that really worked hard over a long time to help us achieve this status.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Blue.

Important to mention too.

Thank you a lot.

On different digital platforms, we continue being active and growing bit by bit.

As we turn now to the middle of this roundtable, where we'll look at project scale updates.

And through systems engineering, and Alex's in particular vision for understanding this hierarchical nested nature of our ecosystem organization and project based teams,

In 2024, following Chris Fields' Physics as Information Processing course, we decided to jump in fully to the prepare, measure paradigm.

So here's Alice and Bob or System A and B communicating.

And this could be communication of a thing through time, could be across a communications interface.

so we thought about different ways to use active inference to learn and apply active inference and saw a connection here between the project-based teams and organizational approach and to connect that to the quantum active inference prepare measure cycle and so it's only been half of a year however it's been a very interesting dynamic already

with quite quickly in the beginning of the year and then also continuing people submitted project preparations and updated whether it was an institute project that was just kind of re-entering the system or projects from people we knew, projects from people we didn't know various people completed these

project proposal forms and their projects were listed as active.

And then just in the last several days with many people's measure forms being submitted,

The rest of this roundtable and the newsletter, which is basically the same information broadly, same updates, is prepared essentially in a copy-paste format from what people have reported at the project scale in their own learning.

So this is really exciting to see not just the code of forms capacity, the kind of digital affordances that can be implemented various ways,

but really the fact that people want to and are submitting more and more parts of their experience on projects of their own, other projects and so on.

So I look forward to this continuing to increase

And across multiple scales, new and creative uses of the preparation and the measurements.

It's a really just exciting way to kind of not just learn by doing, but be doing by doing.

And that's pretty cool with Active Inference.

Any general thoughts on this or anything quantum active?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, let me add something.

I want to say that from the very beginning we tried to apply some first principles into organizational development and process development, starting from Active Inference Systems approach.

and now even quantum information processing and it's possibly could look simple like two new entities prepare measurement forms but I believe as they are based on really like real physics with the current state of the physics it will bring into organization into institute a great affordances to develop based on it


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Alex.

Very well said.

Anyone else?

Okay, we'll just jump into projects.

So first from the Eduactive, which is education organizational unit.

Just to give a snapshot and separate out the projects into those hosted at the Institute and those happening in the broader ecosystem.

First in the broader ecosystem, Susan Hastie's research on negotiation affordances, Ana Magdalena Hurtado's

work on Uniphysica.

We'll get to these updates.

Pablo FM and others with Numinia and Shana Dobson, Hector Manrique and Dean and others in the math art conversation.

So those are projects that facilitators have just stepped up to do.

And several of the core educational projects at the Institute, the active inference ontology, audio visual production, textbook group and the journal.

So let's hear a little bit more about those projects.

On the textbook group, Cohort 6 will continue with the second half of the book, and Cohort 7 will begin from the beginning of the book on July 15th.

It'll be a fun go-around again.

It'll have some classic and familiar characters, like the acting fontology,

and using different kinds of question-based methods for learning and asking fun collaborative discussions.

There'll also be some different elements.

It'll be on a three-week rhythm.

We'll do two weeks per chapter, and then each of the cohorts will have a third week.

In the second half of the book, that third week will be more about applying Active Inference, looking more at the code, which is what the second half of the book is about.

And in the third week of the first half of the book, we'll explore more what that might look like.

And also with collaboration with Andrew Pendlin, we will have some additional math learning collaborations.

And there's a lot of fun continued work on the textbook.

So it'll be fun to have had that month or two off, jump back into second half of the year with a textbook group.

Any other textbook group thoughts?

all right in production we've had some fun videos over the last couple months if anyone um wants to call out any specific live stream that they participated in or viewed and thought was fun go for it there was nine guest streams there was an art stream six insights uh excellently

planned and executed by Darius and including the Ian McGilchrist surprise, which is, I think, happening concurrently.

There were several math art streams that were very creative and very exciting.

We did a paper-based live stream series, number 57, which was the first in a few months on the paper by Parr, Friston, and Zeidman, Active Data Selection.

That was extremely relevant and a really promising direction for the development of Active Inference.

And there was NordicStream with Nathan Schneider on governable spaces that was also really cool.

So anyone want to add any other thoughts?

Okay, on other updates from EduActive.

From the Fundamentals of Active Inference project, we concluded a phase of work with Sanjeev in his incredible odyssey of the Fundamentals of Active Inference.

We concluded essentially weekly meetings since the beginning of 2023, and we look forward to next phases for that project and work.

Ana Magdalena Ortada reports from Uniphysica project and I'm sure we'll hear more from their work.

Susan Hastie's weekly meetings also came to a excellent closure in the action research on collective foraging project as she heads into some new programs and directions for the work.

Pablo FM reported from the Numinia project from one of the symposia there was a demonstration of an active inference game in an escape room in the same spirit has been built which is kind of fun and people can check it out in the newsletter where everything is for all the links and all that

the math art project so kind of in the same forest as the live streams from math art but part of the broader conversation bert who continues to do awesome work in the internship made a short report that i know there's so much more to say on and from the journal project alex and holly want to share anything or what what is exciting from journals


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I kind of mentioned it already that I'm interested in doing retrieval augmented generation.

And so I was able to get a huge one terabyte disc from you, Daniel, and take all those videos and transcribe them using a local Whisper model on my server here at home.

So that was nice in terms of not having to pay too much money out to get those transcripts done by, you know, third party tooling.

So, and yeah, and using open source models so we can start to, you know, make use of those transcripts.

And I'm pretty excited about that.

So, Alex, anything you want to add?


SPEAKER_05:
No, great.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

All right, to re-inference.

All right, just kind of snapshotting what projects we have that are active.

So essentially those that have provided us a measurement and any that aren't here can be brought back on by measurement.

From the ecosystem, Jeremy Cooper and others have been working on active inference account of belief updating in PTSD.

Michael Karl and others have been working on the active inference model of translations for language.

J.F.

mentioned the symbolic cognitive robotics and Shigeru Rahman has continued work in writing on the humanity story of uncertain self.

At the Institute, we continue faster and slower and differently on knowledge engineering and seeing different opportunities for the kinds of knowledge engineering approaches that might benefit active inference in the ecosystem.

Active Blockference, combining Active Inference with the CAD-CAD Systems Engineering Framework by BlockScience, is continuing to proceed on a few different directions.

And then one of our major activities in ReInference has been the RxInfer Learning and Development Group.

So just to sort of

contextualize this in active model stream 4.1 implementing active inference by message passing in a factor graph from august 2021 i looked back to see this presentation by bias lab

and see what they had planned to have done for the future of applying reactive message passing which at that point was a research advance on top of the factor graph formalism the Forney factor graph, constrained Forney factor graph and so on had enabled better logistics to go from the Bayesian graph to the variational message passing

and then this reactive feature was getting added in and so it's just really interesting to see how they laid out forney lab 2.0 forneylab.jl 2.0 and then come 2024

We're having great times in the engineering channel, in Discord, and on a lot of people's personal projects.

Kobus's work at Learnable Loop, people interested in using Rx and Fur at different kinds of hackathons and different projects.

And then also a crossover moment with the textbook group was with the help of some members of the BIOS Lab,

Here's one of the early figures from the 2022 textbook of the frog jumping out of the hand or the something jumping out of the hand or not.

And then here's what the app model block for RxInfer looks like.

And so seeing this kind of an isomorphic mapping between the visual representation, the code, the analytical formalisms, the art, all these different edges, that's what kind of the fun has always been suggested to be.

So to start to see the operational improvements in reactive message passing and the way that the groups and the developers involved in this project are closing the gap between what is suggested in principle and in computer science proof of example, and taking it to just an amazing engineering informed level.

Anyone want to add anything on Oryx Infer?


SPEAKER_05:
I want to say that it's really great development and it's

good that we organized that group of people who are beginners on learning that toolbox and I believe that toolbox which should provide affordance to build agents and collective agents are

will be a base for some breakthrough in artificial intelligence and possibly we are putting some cornerstone for it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Alex.

And thanks to the many participants who are just doing awesome discussion in the Engineering Channel, contributions to the coda and to the GitHub directly.

All right, from the Active Inference Ontology project, there have been quite a few updates.

Dave Douglas, as always, leading the V of birds, has produced two amazing open source works that are almost like snapshots of really

broad ontological inquiries.

So first, a single author paper aligning spatial web terms to SUMO, which is in reference to the IEEE P2874 standards draft and working group.

connecting that to sumo which has always been this kind of vision of incorporating multiple ontologies including formal ones like sumo and then also in a snapshot of our primary active inference ontology

We had a number of authors join this open source snapshot about aligning the active inference ontology to SUMO.

So starting to triangulate and constellate multiple ontologies along the way, learning a lot about

using, communicating, languaging around them and different functionalities and niches for different structures and visions of ontology.

So that kind of like meta-ontological active inference component and also bringing the active inference ontology in a connected way to formality while also exploring in the very same project

and in kind of other meetings and spaces, more of the informalizable ineffable components.

So that's pretty cool to see.

Any ontology ideas?


SPEAKER_05:
Just a short note that it's okay to have multiple scales of models and have meta, meta, meta models.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

All right, and from other re-inference updates, we have Andrew and JF.

So how about Andrew, and then JF, if you want to add any more.

What have you been working on?


SPEAKER_06:
uh yeah and thanks for having me uh so um yeah quick hearkening back to other projects i've been working with jeremy cooper on the updating uh belief dynamics it's a computational psychiatry project focusing on ptsd and something i really appreciate about the institute

is its way to kind of remotely bring together a variety of people and researchers of different backgrounds.

That group includes a computational neuroscientist, a clinical therapist, and then you have someone like me, and we're all learning kind of as we're doing in order to try and recreate something like the belief dynamics of an individual who has PTSD in the direction of development.

developing treatments.

So it's been a super valuable experience as well as on and off working with the RX and FER group as I continue to develop my own ability to kind of code active inference agents and simulations.

So yeah, here, this project, active agents and active inference approach to agent-based modeling in the social sciences, I'll be giving that.

this year at the 10th international conference on computational social science being held at university of pennsylvania basically the tutorial attempts to address a growing interest in more cognitively complex agents to be used in agent-based modeling as opposed to just strict

if then sort of agents, if this happens, then they necessarily do this and so on, giving them the ability to make inferences.

So I've taken a lot of inspiration from

work like your own work, Daniel, on the inference project.

That was my first foray into thinking, OK, we can model an individual agent, but how do you model multiple as they interact in an environment that changes, which then impacts them, getting a better grasp of differentiation between internal and external states.

It's been great, as well as another paper by some folks from the Scientific Advisory Board for the Institute, Mo Albarracin and Connor Hines, which is also really great, very social science oriented work.

So I'm doing something in turn as kind of they did.

I created a simulation that recreates a common social science paradigm, multiple agents working in a network, engaging in parallel problem solving.

And using active inference, it recreates the dynamics of the original paradigm if you were to run it through NetLogo or some other common software.

But you can also look under the hood at the agent's own beliefs.

And I think that this could be used potentially for policy development.

It could be used for if you have students assigned a group project, how much do they actually learn to rely upon themselves working in a group as opposed to stealing their neighbor's answers?

So interesting stuff anyway.


SPEAKER_00:
kind of over speaking here but uh thanks for including this in the uh in the talk here so awesome cool and helping facilitate the previous interval of the textbook group too and and with ali on that too jf


SPEAKER_04:
Sure.

So the Symbolic Cognitive Robotics Project asks the question, what does it take at a minimum for a simple mobile robot to survive in a world it knows initially very little about?

So the focus is on learning through engagement with an agent's environment.

It focuses on the development of agency

in a robot, which starts with very little in terms of cognitive constructs and through engagement, through acquisition of experience, grows a society of mind, a collective of simple cognition actors

which each one quite specialized in terms of what it can perceive and what it can do.

And they all work together in the sense that a Caucasian actor will, through observations of its umwelt, generate synthesized beliefs, which will then become

observations to more abstract cognition actors.

So you have this ladder of belief abstraction that is built up through active engagement in the environment through

learning what simple perceptions mean, learning what affordances there are, what can the robot do.

And as the robot grows its collective of cognition actors, the conjecture is that it will detect trends and

how its beliefs, its more and more abstract beliefs, map homeostatic signals.

Am I doing something that benefits my survival and my continued survival?

So it's really a project about how an agent learns its own agency.

learns its affordances, learns to make sense of its perceptions through more and more elaborate beliefs.

And all of this sense-making is grounded in the survival imperative.

Now, of course, the physical robot is not mortal.

I mean, I can turn it off, turn it back on.

It's still there.

It's like your computer.

But the society of mind will grow through its experiences, through its learning, is itself mortal.

And I set up an experimental environment such that the robot has a minimum amount of time in order to grow competencies at exploring and foraging.

Otherwise, it expends its store of energy without ever replenishing it.

So it needs to forge to replenish.

It needs also to avoid collisions because collisions are deleterious to its health.

It needs also to keep a level of engagement, otherwise it

It essentially retreats away from the environment.

So all these motivations activate this society of mind that the robot grows over time.

And all I'm trying to do is set up these mechanisms and launch the robot and see if it can grow, make up its own mind basically about the world it needs to engage with.

So there are notions of collective intelligence, there are notions of mortal computing, there are notions of grounded sense-making, affordance discovery.

There's also a very big nod

to Immanuel Kant and his epistemology, because the robot needs to develop causal theories of its perceptions.

How can I predict what I will perceive next?

is is very important so a very strong notion of predictive processing based on the discovery of causal theory how do i make sense uh of of the perceptions and the actions that i that i engage into how can it how can i predict what happens next

And all these concepts are brought together in a hole that hopefully leads to autonomous agency and really simple Lego robots, which brings in a dimension of fun as well, because these robots are really fun to build and fun to run.

And my hope is that not only does the robot get to learn how to survive, but that we can observe its behaviors and its visible states and subject them to an active inference analysis and be able to demonstrate that, yes, indeed,

The robot reduces its variational free energy and gets better at it over time or not.

So it's a very fun project.

And I get a lot of input from the community.

And I'm constantly fed by all the material that the Institute produces.

So it's a very fun thing to do.


SPEAKER_00:
Awesome.

Thank you both for the updates.

All right, that'll be... Go ahead, please.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, as for Andrew's work, I believe at some point it could be integrated into social sciences course somehow, if it's interesting.

Possibly it could be not only another chapter in the course, but also somehow augment other chapters with some computational approach and RxInfo practice.

and i want to say big thanks for jf for his continuous work on his robotics projects it's really great and really great to see in its development through the time thank you very much thank you i agree with that anyone else want to make any comments on reinference or projects


SPEAKER_03:
I'd ask a question to JF if we have a second.

Can you just talk a little bit about your use of the term symbolic and symbolic cognitive?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

So the causal theories

that the robot discovers.

And I have to say, its mind is a society of cognition actors.

And each cognition actor will want to develop a causal theory to predict what it will observe next in its own limited umwelt.

Those causal theories are essentially logic programs that it discovers.

I will observe C if I'm observing A and B, for example.

So much of the learning done by the robot are captured as either logic programs, which are symbolic, or as beliefs, which are also symbolic predicates.

so the the the world view that the robot develops internally intrinsically is expressed symbolically as these logic programs and and these predicates thus symbolic in what language

Ah, I use two programming languages for the symbolic processing and discovery of causal theories.

I use Prolog, which is very well suited to state, to express state search.

problems, search space problems and to solving them.

And I use a functional language called elixir to implement perception and action basically interfacing with the robots percept sensors and actuators prologue and elixir.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

All right.

as we head into the last part of the stream.

So if anyone has questions from live chat, they can write it.

Otherwise, I will

make some notes on one slide and then anyone who wants to bring up anything or ask anything or or anything that they're excited about for the second half of the year or however they can go for it so um in the hour before this stream ends ends on the verge of a loss of nothing to share I just brought in some pictures from the prior weeks and

wanted to open this space and have the time of reflection and this multi-scale self and multi-scale time and space concepts and just where have we been we're in the round table where are we at where are we heading and then where when how etc is active inference on that and and just a few of the adventures of the last week well first where where were we in the last

end of the last round table and here we had these multiple horizons and what was happening in active inference and what we could be doing and a a visit to

post archival materials and a visit to view bucky fuller's archive materials both really impressed upon me the the relevance and necessity of documentation archiving intergenerational cultural contact and many more things and this was a funny picture taken from a diner

we deliver norms but we don't only deliver norms we're also part of them and so on so that was kind of a funny sign to see and then just in terms of where when not traveling where i'm traveling and how to move into the next half of the year

so that's all i'll say there how about just anything people want to ask or mention for coming forward i have a question why is your bike called red queen oh just kind of moving faster and faster and staying in the same place

Anyone want to add anything?

Yeah, Alex.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I want to say thanks to everyone who participated today, and that's great that we're back to the format of participating more broad participants than just officers, and it will be great to see people in the next rounds.

So let's continue.


SPEAKER_06:
Actually, I had a quick question.

I used to be much more involved with the engineering group, the RxInfer group, and I fortunately had to sideline my participation with it.

Have there been any particularly interesting developments recently, aside from the live stream?


SPEAKER_00:
What to say?

Well, other than look at the documents and their repos,

several things have been learnt and developed kobus's work at learnable loop and also the developer team's examples have very rapidly caught up with the major release 3.0 which was a somewhat breaking change in the sense that the prior app models were changed and didn't work in 3.0 but it's built in a better way so to see how fast

the developers were able to iterate on the versioning and then the learning of the model building.

And then as we start to have people with more computer science, less, more active inference, less, and engineering experience and all this, and all these different perspectives, and that helps to disentangle where are the paths that lead into the analytical details of message passing

How is that being implemented from what space of ways it could be implemented?

So like what's required by RxInfer and RxEnvironments?

What's just a norm of use, emerging norm of use, but not something required?

So a lot of this is still being fleshed out, but to see some new types of models, open source models,

And then just personally, like to be able to take Cobus's examples, copy them into an online cloud browser notebook,

hit run all, reload the page, hit run all again, and have a real drone active inference simulation, schematic, but educational, run in two clicks.

It's just something we didn't have one, two, three, et cetera, years ago.

So to be, and for that to be not just a wrapper or like a buffer around a simplified way

But that rather to be an interpretable engineering grade spec that's just brilliantly abstracted from the reactive message passing, it's a major tech unlock.


SPEAKER_06:
Super cool.

Also bonus points that you can so quickly reproduce the code in your own system or in your browser and run it.

That's what I'm doing for my conference.

I'm doing everything in Google CoLab so that attendees can just hop in.

If you have a Google account, you can do whatever you want.

I think that's a great sort of learning resource for Institute members and others to just keep it ready to go.

No need to

dig through a ton of library archives and subdirectories to finally get the thing running.


SPEAKER_00:
Anyone else want to add or ask anything?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes, since it's my first presence at this roundtable, I'd just like to express that

how much I appreciate the openness and the welcoming nature of this community.

It really encourages multiple backgrounds, multiple perspectives.

It listens.

And it speaks in many voices.

And I find that it really

promotes true open science.

And it's, it's, I don't take it for granted.

It is rare, and I appreciate it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you, Jeff.

Okay, last call.

Okay.

Thank you everyone.

Thanks everybody joining and looking forward to see you around.

So, bye.