## 6gw6KEX10vo

Hello and welcome. It is April 29th, 2024. We're in Active Guest Stream 82.1 with Robert
Worden discussing Bayesian Model-Based Cognition, the requirement equation. Thank you, Robert,
to you for introduction and jumping into a presentation and discussion. Thanks for joining.
Hi, I'm Robert Worden and I work Theoretical Neurobiology Group at UCL London. I'm going
to talk in this live stream about an equation called the requirement equation, which has a lot
to do with free energy principle and active inference, but it's not the same thing. And I
hope this is the first of a series of live streams talking about how we apply these ideas to 3D
spatial cognition, particularly, and eventually to consciousness. But to get on with this
presentation, here's a summary of the key ideas. The main idea of this requirement equation is to ask,
not ask what brains have to do, not ask how they do it. And so this approach is different from the free
energy principle and active inference, but I believe it complements it in a way I'll try to explain.
So, as a statement of what brains have to do, there is this requirement equation, which is a
mathematical equation, essentially brains need to compute it or to give the same answer as if they
computed it to give the greatest possible fitness to their owners. So that's, it's a statement of what
brains need to do. And it's not a statement of how they need to do it. Doesn't say anything about neurons or
pre-energy minimization or anything like that. It simply says to get as fit as possible, a brain has
to do this. And I'll describe what this is. And it turns out this requirement equation is like Bayes'
theorem. It's very similar to Bayes' theorem, but it has some extra terms in it. And you'll see that.
And because it's the fittest possible brain, brains have to evolve towards the requirement equation,
towards doing that thing. And the trouble is the requirement equation itself is too expensive to
compute and brains don't compute it. So animals don't compute it, but they have to produce very similar
results to that. But we can compute the requirement equation. We can compute it by brute force.
And this makes no assumptions about how brains do it. And so that gives the best possible fitness.
That's a kind of yardstick against which you can calibrate any model of cognition.
And particularly you can use it to calibrate and test free FEP and active inference models.
And I'll put the viewpoint that they are really approximations to this equation. And so we can test
active inference models by comparing their results with the requirement equation results.
So the first part of this talk is to derive this equation and show you how it works.
The second part of the talk is to show how it can be used to test and calibrate
active inference models. And the third part in point six is just a few remarks about internal Bayesian models.
Okay, so to start, how do we characterize what a brain does without making assumptions about how it does it?
And the first characterization is a black box that takes sense data as it inputs
and produces choices of actions as it outputs. So that's all a brain does.
It takes a set of sense data, D, which can include vision, touch, all sorts of stuff.
And then it chooses an action.
Now, we want to go a little beyond that black box model.
And we're going to what I call a gray box model shown in the lower diagram.
And what happens is this.
The brain examines it has a set of possible actions, AI.
I is one, two, three, etc.
Now, for each of those possible actions, it calculates some real function,
F of D and A.
And that real function depends on both the sense data and the action it's going to choose.
So F is a kind of expected payoff for that action in these circumstances.
And then the brain compares all the possible Fs.
So here we are on the bottom left diagram.
It's computing a bunch of different Fs in parallel.
And then it puts them all to a comparison.
And it picks the biggest one.
It picks the best possible payoff from any action.
And so this is the gray box model.
It's assuming the brain looks at all the alternatives and chooses the best one.
But it doesn't assume anything more than that.
It doesn't assume how it computes the Fs or what the Fs are.
It just assumes that it compares them all and picks the best one.
So that's kind of minimal set of assumptions about how a brain works.
Now we'll go on to put that set of assumptions inside
a real-life situation where we've got probabilities.
And this comes in the next diagram.
This is a kind of meta model of how brains work.
Life for an animal is divided into a number of different domains,
where it has different kinds of decisions to make.
And it has encounters in each domain.
And we'll show here a picture of one encounter in one domain.
So we start on the left.
There is S, which is a state of affairs.
That's a state of the world.
And it has a certain probability, a prior probability, P of S.
And the animal doesn't know what that state is, of course.
But the state gives rise to sense data in the animal.
And these two arrows here show sense data about the external world
and sense data about the animal's internal state.
So the animal has some sense data of D, which it receives with a conditional probability.
For any given state S, it gets sense data of D with a conditional probability P of D given S.
And then there's a decision function F that I talked about in the previous slide.
And it computes F of D and A for all the possible A's it might think of doing.
And then it chooses one of the actions A.
And what happens when it chooses an action is the action A and the previous state S
lead to a next state, which are called S prime.
And so that comes about with a certain conditional probability.
Again, P of S prime given S and A.
And that next state has a certain value to the animal.
And that value relates in some way to its lifetime fitness.
And so that's in principle the computation.
And the assumption is the brains act as if they've computed F of D, A to choose their actions.
And this as if will turn out to be very important.
And so how do we use the probabilities in terms of an actual situation?
The mean payoff.
An animal has loads of different encounters in its life.
And the mean payoff is just given by this expression.
And so W is the average over all the states of affairs it's going to encounter, weighted by their probabilities.
And then each state of affairs gives us some sense data D with a certain probability.
So it gets all the possible sense status that it might have.
And then it makes a decision, chooses an action A of D.
And that produces a new state, S prime, with a probability P of S prime given S and A of D.
And there's a value for the new state, value for the animal of a new state.
For instance, if it's dead, the value is zero and so on.
So this is just a straight application of probabilities, the previous diagram, and you get that formula.
And then you just rearrange the formula slightly.
What you do is you shove this first term, PS, inside the second term, and then you write it this way.
W is a sum of functions J of D.
And J of D is this thing.
And it's already beginning to look very like Bayes' theorem, you can see.
But it's got some extra stuff at the end.
It's got these values stuck in at the end.
So that is the first step towards this requirement equation.
And to understand how it's used, what I'm going to do is to choose a very simple example of an animal.
A simple special case.
And the simple special case, come out here, is an animal that has only two actions.
And I think you can imagine something like a clam living in the sea.
A, it has two actions.
It can open up and try to consume food, or it can shut down.
It can clam up.
And so those two actions are called action one and action two.
And this simple animal has very little sense data.
It only has one piece of sense data.
It can say detect the salinity of the water or the temperature of the water.
And that thing it can detect with its sense data has values between 0 and 1.
And now we consider various kinds of this simple animal.
Firstly, we consider two no-brainer animals.
And no-brainer is an animal that doesn't use its sense data and just makes the same choice of actions the whole time.
And so the animal that is open all the time, it gets value H1 of D.
And depending on D, it gets a payoff positive, less positive, more positive, and so on.
An animal that stays closed all the time gets a payoff H2 of G.
And so you can see that for each of these two no-brainer animals,
the average payoff is just the integral of P of D times H of D over this interval 0 to 1.
So that's the payoff for a no-brainer animals, either W1 or W2.
But an animal can do better than that if it uses its sense data to choose which action to take.
So a brainy animal can choose the correct H that gives a bigger payoff in terms of any sense data D.
So a brainy animal can ride the top of this curve.
It can go down here along the green curve, along the red curve, and finally along the green curve.
Now that gives the greatest possible payoff, the greatest possible average payoff in all situations.
So it's the greatest possible fitness.
So a brainy animal that can compute these two functions, H1 and H2,
and can always choose the largest one, is going to get the best possible fitness.
And if it gets it wrong, if it's got some inaccuracy in the way it computes H1 or H2,
so these overlap points move around a little, it gets less average fitness.
Or actually away from that best point.
So that's what happens in a very simple case where you've got two actions and one real piece of sense data.
Now we're going to generalize back again.
And you can see what kind of decision function this simple animal's got to make.
The decision function it's got to calculate is basically the average fitness.
And that gives it the greatest possible fitness overall situations.
So if we generalize away from this to the more general case, can you see all that slide?
I hope you can. Yes.
So we generalize this case to when the animal's got more choices of action,
say five actions or an infinite number of actions and more sense data, different dimensions of sense data.
And you can see when you generalize away from the simple case to the general case that the best possible decision function
is given by this equation.
The decision function F is the sum of rule states of the probability of the state
weighted by the post theory of probability,
the value of the final state.
And we could simplify that by this equation.
But that equation is basically a definition which doesn't say anything about what happens inside a brain,
how it computes it.
It says if a brain chooses the same actions as if it had worked out these equations,
it gets the best possible fitness.
So the requirement equation, which is here, says what brains are required to do.
And any brain chooses actions as if it had done all this as the best possible fitness.
So that means that brains will evolve to choose actions as if they computed this equation,
which you can see is very like Bayes' theorem.
And so that's the first result that comes out of this work is that
Bayesian cognition, the assumption that animals use Bayesian cognition is not really a hypothesis.
I believe Carl Friston has said and has been quoted as saying that it is a hypothesis.
This result implies it's not really a hypothesis.
It follows from a piece of analysis that makes no assumptions about how brains do what they do.
So I should say this derivation of the requirement equation has some similarities to
partially observable Markov decision processes and some differences.
And you'll have to look at the paper to find out those.
So that, if you like, is the end of the first part of the talk, which is deriving this equation and
uh saying that is a way of analyzing what any brain is needed to do.
The second part of the talk is how you use this equation.
So all terms that you put in the requirement equation, all those probabilities
depend on things happening outside the brain. They depend on states for fairs in in the environment.
They depend on sense data. They depend on what's the payoff.
What's what happens to the animal after it takes various actions.
So it's all external biology.
And you don't have to make assumptions about what's going on in the brain to compute it.
And that I think is a big advantage.
Now we can write down the requirement equation in lots of different domains.
And to do that, we have to model biology, which we can observe directly,
rather than modeling brains, which we can't observe very well.
The trouble is computing this requirement equation is very expensive.
It's expensive in four different ways.
Because to really compute it, you have to sum over all possible states s.
You have to do the parallel computation over all possible actions a.
You have to sum over all possible subsequent states s prime.
And in some domains, you have to come to compute the value.
You have to have branching look into different future situations.
So it's very expensive and it's not tractable in animal brains.
It will be too slow to try and too expensive to compute.
So animal brains don't compute this equation.
They do much cheaper as if calculations.
Now, having said that, animals don't compute it.
We can compute it because we have digital computers.
And we can do the Monte Carlo integrations and we do the optimizations and so on to do all of this by brute force.
And that's what I will call brute force Bayesian computation.
And that we can compute it.
It acts as a kind of yardstick which we can use to compare actual animal behavior.
How well they compute their choices of action and any cognitive model, including models built in active inference.
So that I'll skip over this slide just to say you can apply this equation in all sorts of domains.
Skip. Right.
So coming on to active inference.
FEP and AI models are not like the requirement equation in that they do make assumptions about what happens in brains.
They assume there's a generative model, which is a simplified version of the actual generative process.
Some simplification that the animal uses in his brain.
They use variational model fitting.
They minimize a variation on free energy, minimize a KL divergence between that and minimizing a KL divergence is the process.
And they have a certain model of the fitness payoffs of actions and they are represented as biased prior probabilities.
And the animal has a goal to minimize its survival.
And then active inference.
It predicts how animals make the tradeoff between exploration,
trying to get sense data to help better future decisions and exploitation here and now.
So there's a whole load of assumptions in there which are different from the requirement equation.
And so for any FEP or active inference model, we can test those assumptions against the requirement equation.
And this procedure to do that is here.
You first compute the FEP-AR model, which you've been doing already anyway.
And you define the equivalent requirement equation.
And so you make biological assumptions about the states in the environment, about the sense data, about the consequences of actions and so on.
And then you compute the requirement equation.
And that, as I said, you can do by brute force integration and optimization.
And then you compare the two sets of results.
Requirement equation and FEP results.
You compare them in terms of the lifetime fitness.
How many encounters of this kind does an animal have in its lifetime?
How much does the fitness vary between the two?
And you get a fitness gap between the requirement equation and the FEP result.
And the requirement equation is in some sense bound to come out fitter.
And so there'll be a gap.
And if that gap is significant, even a very small gap, one percent, natural selection will have improved on the FEP model.
In other words, if there's a one percent difference in fitness between two animals in 100 generations, the fitter animal comes to dominate the population.
And based on that, you can refine the FEP model.
In other words, you can ask questions like what's the sense data which makes the largest fitness gap?
What can we do to get the FEP model better for those kinds of sense data?
So I'll illustrate this process here.
Some animal has a lifetime fitness between measure percentages.
We compute what that is in the requirement equation.
So that's that point there.
We also compute what it is in the FEP.
And those are different.
And we can also, by the way, look at no brainer animals.
We just make the same stupid decision every time.
Or real animals.
All four points on this graph can be computed.
And the interesting comparison is here between the FEP active inference and the requirement equation.
So the question we're asking is how close is the FEP model to the optimum?
And what is the gap between the two?
And what difference is that going to make over, say, 100 generations of natural selection?
Now, I think this comparing with the requirement equation is a very useful thing to do for an FEP and AI models.
It's a win-win test.
If the model comes very close to the optimum, then you've confirmed it.
You can't do better than that.
But if it's not very close, you can work out how to improve it.
You work out what sense data it's not doing so well for,
and how to make it do better for those sense data.
Right.
Now we come on to the third part of the talk, and the headline is that brains are not always Bayesian.
I know it has been stated an assumption that brains are Bayesian.
The requirement equation tells you exactly what are the circumstances under which they are Bayesian,
and under what circumstances they don't need to be Bayesian.
And it turns out that in complex domains where there are complicated choices of actions,
the brain needs to build an internal model.
And the two most complex domains in that respect are two-dimensional navigation,
finding your way around, and 3D spatial cognition.
And there's always been a kind of debate between in modeling people and inactivist
people who say the brain just reacts to events.
And you can prove this way that in complex domains, an inactivist brain may do a job,
but it doesn't do as good a job as a brain that makes an internal model.
And so you can prove in certain domains, mainly the complicated ones, that you need to build internal models.
You can't prove that in all domains.
In simple domains, models aren't needed.
And these are domains in which there are very few choices of action or very simple states or simple sense data.
And in these simple domains, the as if computation can be very simple.
It can just be a matter of some very simple neural relay and no internal model is needed.
And an example of that is a special case that I use to motivate the requirement equation,
where you've only got two possible actions.
You don't have to build a complete internal model of what's going on.
You simply have to know the thresholds at which you switch from one action to the other.
This can be seen in terms of information capacity.
What comes into the brain is some Bayesian priors, which have made it evolve,
and some sense data.
And it makes an internal model, or may or may not make an internal model,
and then it chooses actions.
And it's a very small information content.
Then it doesn't need to make a big complicated internal model in order to make that simple choice.
So the information in the internal model needs to be less than the information in the choice of actions.
And if the choice of actions is very simple, small information content,
there is no point in constructing a very complicated internal model.
It's a waste of effort.
So if you regard the brain's internal models as an informational channel between sense data and actions,
then you can see the information model is very necessary in complex domains,
but not so necessary in simple domains.
So if you're not interested in the brain, you should not trust the good regulator theorem.
Now in FEP literature, the good regulator theorem is often cited as support for the idea that brains need internal models.
I'll just very briefly say I don't believe it does give them support.
When you compare it with the requirement meta model and the good regulator theorem,
which was a paper in 1970 by Conan and Ashby,
that has a couple of different meta models of what cognition is about.
So I think that's a good idea.
And it's based on Ashby's ideas of homeostasis.
But I think the argument they make, Conan and Ashby make from the good regulator theorem,
I don't think it really holds up.
And I've just listed the reasons here.
There's the good regulator result.
That every good regulator of the system is a model of that system.
And here's the requirement equation result.
In complex domains only, the fittest brains compute a model of the domain.
Now the regulator model, I'll assert, is not a realistic model.
It lacks some key ingredient.
And it's less realistic.
It assumes a homeostatic picture of a brain.
Whereas the requirement equation analysis is much more flexible and realistic.
But mainly this fourth point, the regulator concept of a model is not a graduated.
It's a yes, no, all or nothing concept.
And what it says is a model.
How do they define a model?
You can have any function of the system variables can be a model of the system,
even a very trivial function.
And so the concept of a model they use is a binary yes, no concept.
But the real meaning of a model in everyday life and in science is a graduated.
In other words, the more complicated, the more detail there is in a model,
the more it counts as a model.
So this is just my personal beef.
You should not be using the Goodner Regulator Theorem to justify internal models.
A few remarks about how brains evolve because obviously this analysis
depends totally on the idea that the requirement equation defines the fittest possible brain
and brains evolve towards that optimum.
And as I said, even a small deficit in lifetime fitness, even a 1% deficit in lifetime fitness,
over 100 generations, that gives enough selection pressure to make something start dominating the population.
But if the properties in the habitat change rapidly,
brains can't catch up.
They only evolve very slowly by random mutations.
And therefore, if the properties in the habitat are changing,
brains need to learn and they need to learn fast within a short animal lifetime.
And you can actually apply this requirement equation analysis to learning.
And animal learning, it turns out, is very close to the kind of learning you get out of the requirement equation.
On the other hand, if properties in the habitat stay constant for a very long time,
brains can evolve to come very close to the optimum.
And the key place where this is the case is spatial cognition, 3D spatial cognition.
And the key place where the states of the world have to obey some very strong constraints.
They have to obey Euclidean geometry and they obey constraints of physics.
And these constraints have been true for all even evolutionary time.
So animal brains have evolved to embody those constraints very precisely.
A final point is that animals we know have very precise and sensitive sense organs.
They would not have evolved if the brain couldn't make the very best use of the data from them.
So here's a plug for the next live stream.
The next live stream is applying these ideas to 3D spatial cognition.
Understanding three dimensional local space is actually the most important thing a brain can do,
because it has a very huge impact on survival.
Because it's a 3D model of local space is used to control physical movements at every moment in the day.
And if the model is as inaccurate, mistakes in movement can cost the animal's life any time.
And they're also used for recognizing things and actions.
So the selection pressure to get the internal model of 3D space good has been very strong and sustained
over 500 million years since the Cambrian explosion when animals first had limbs and precise sense data.
Even insects control their movements very well.
And consciousness shows that our own internal human internal model of space is a good precise model.
So the 3D model of space is a very good model.
And what this next live stream is going to talk about is how you build that,
how you build neural models of 3D local space.
Now, people have, there have been very few attempts to do this.
There are no working
neural models of 3D spatial cognition that I know about.
One of the reasons is the architecture.
How do you, what's the neural architecture to represent three dimensions of space?
Neural sheets can represent two dimensional space, but there's no equivalent architecture for 3D.
And the key problem is neural spatial memory.
If you represent spatial coordinates by neuron firing rates,
it turns out that that memory is too imprecise and too slow.
Insects, for instance, have a tiny fraction of a second to work out what their surroundings are like.
And in that space of time, you can't get precise representation of 3D space using neuron firing.
So in the next live stream, I will introduce the proposal that 3D space is not represented by neuron firing at all,
but it's represented by a wave in the brain.
And that wave is actually a projective transform of 3D space.
And that's the same transform was used in the projective consciousness model, PCM, which is an FEP derived model of consciousness.
So that's a commercial for the next live stream.
So that's a commercial for the next live stream.

Gosh, I've been quick.
30 minutes.
There are two kinds of modeling you can do.
You can model biology or you can model the brain.
And modeling biology is a great deal easier because we can observe it.
We can observe easily what's happening to animals in their habitat.
Whereas modeling what happens inside the brain is more difficult.
There's much more hypothesis and guesswork about it.
And the requirement equation approach, which I've talked about in this talk,
only requires modeling biology, only to model events outside the brain.
And you can compute this requirement equation in any domain in your life.
And it defines the very best a brain can do.
So it's a kind of yardstick against which you compare actual brains and models of brains.
And so you compare the requirement equation with any active inference model.
And that I say is a win win for the model, because if the model comes close to the optimum,
then you've confirmed it.
But it doesn't come close.
You can use what you learn to work out how to improve it.
And I would offer to work with anybody who wants to make that kind of comparison with their active inference models.
Okay, so I finished rather ahead of time.
Questions?
Thank you, Robert.
Thank you, Robert.
All right.
Thank you for the presentation.
There's a lot to discuss.
And also people can write questions in a live chat while I'm just like recropping everything.
Do you want to give any like context?
How did you come to study this question?
And how did you get to this equation and why?
I got to this equation about 25 years ago, actually.
And I came back to it when I joined Carl's group and got interested in the requirements in FEP and so on.
And I realized there was a link between it and FEP and active inference.
And I've just been working recently to work out what the link is.
And this is what I think the link is.
But I think it's a very basic foundation for studying the brain is to not make hypotheses about
how brains do what they do, but to just analyze what they have to do.
And I think this is quite a powerful approach in all sorts of domains.
Hope to convert one to other people.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
While questions are kind of coming in, I'll go over a few of my notes just to go over some of these core
pieces because I think there's a lot to say and it's really exciting.
In quantitative evolutionary population biology, fitness is conceived of as like a top-down force,
whereas the generative model is built up as like an agent level view from the inside, like agent-based
modeling with kind of a top-down pressure.
And that's one way to look at that kind of setting.
And I got the sense that I want to explore and learn more about that the requirements equation
sits basically between those two and sets the high bar that gives a requirements for the agent-based model.
Because you can always just build an agent-based model and then have a constraining force.
We know from simulations that that does give improvement of algorithms in simulations,
but it's kind of an open-ended search and there isn't necessarily a calibration.
What do you think about this?
This is a calibration.
If you are prepared to analyze an animal's lifetime in terms of a number of different encounters,
like each time it goes out to get food or each time it meets a potential mate or each time it comes
across a predator and say, what's its probability of surviving all those encounters?
If you are prepared to do the requirement equation analysis, then you can start doing the requirement equation analysis.
In principle, you can find the very best it can do.
That is an endpoint.
If you've got your FEP model and you're improving it, improving it, this is the kind of endpoint
beyond which you don't expect to get, but you know when you're getting near.
Awesome.
And here's one other kind of angle that I was noting.
So the standalone Bayes equation, Bayes with no additional terms, is like this unified imperative
for sense-making.
It can cover discrete or continuous state spaces, single dimension, multiple dimensions.
There's even considerations for like how many parameters should be Bayes optimal,
but it's all framed in terms of this unified sense-making imperative.
The requirements equation, and so then one of the key steps in active inference is to expand
that unified Bayesian imperative to not just the sense-making, but include action,
like a variational auto-encoder with action.
The requirements equation says, well, it's a little bit more over the lifespan than just optimal
sense-making.
Action, but not sense-making has fitness or survival consequences.
So then there's another term that applies to only actions, because there's a direct fitness consequence
of actions and phenotypes.
Whereas the internal sense-making is actually shielded from direct selection,
action because it has no consequence except through the actions in the black or the gray box.
Yeah, I mean, I think active inference is a particular way of making the trade-off between,
I mean, the way I understand it is a bit simple, the trade-off between exploration and exploitation.
In other words, do I fly higher so I can see more prey, or do I go down and actually catch that bit of prey?
And the requirement equation can encompass that, because the value that an animal gets from an action
can be direct exploitation, that it gets a piece of food, or it can be exploration, that it learns
something that it can use downstream.
So that kind of trade-off is made in active inference. There is also the apparatus in the
requirement equation making the same trade-off and seeing if you get the same answers.
Just one last framing, and then I'll go to the live chat questions. Just at the purely empirical,
even just putting aside the evolutionary setting, it's a common theme to make a model and then do
a variance partitioning on the residual and find if it's loaded or associated with anything. So when
we're studying bird migration and empirically 80% survive some stage, and then we're making an agent-based
model, well, we don't want a model where 100% of them survive,
because we've kind of overshot how successful. So then the empirical path could be like, okay,
we just made a simple version and 50% of the simulated birds make the migration.
How is that correlated with the actual? And then what's left in the residual? Oh, it's associated
with age. Okay. Now we include age as a factor in the agent-based model. That eats up some of that
variants. How is the remaining variants associated with known or unknown factors? And so there's an
iterative process where you can discover potentially associated variables and have that in feedback with
the agent-based constructions. Like the agent responds to the requirements as modeled, and then
it looks like they're doing something else that's required that you don't have in your requirements
equation. But it sets a kind of local calibrator again to what kind of performance envelope could
even be expected or relevance so that you don't have in silico experiments where bacteria are trying to
read a book and a person is trying to do a metabolic thing that they can't do. It doesn't make sense. We all
have a feeling like, well, that's not the niche. It's not what they are being selected on for. And so
this again helps put an adapter in between the kind of bulk properties of the niche and then the specific
performance that gets all the way down to thinking like you mentioned about the survival through time
as being the joint distribution of many, many, many, many, many encounters.
Yeah, I mean, I agree with all that. I think the requirement equation can be used to do those kinds of analysis.
When you formulate it, you're really looking at lifetime fitness.
And so you should be looking at all the things that influence lifetime fitness, including things that are nothing to do with
brains at all, as you say, old age or whatever. But nevertheless, the requirement equation, it gives you, I think,
starting just from FEP models and AI models, you have the model on the one hand and
practical observation of animals on the other hand, and you've got nothing in between. But
requirement equation is somehow in between them. But you can say, here's this requirement for what a brain
needs to do. And if a brain does it absolutely as well as that, then here's the survival. So you've got a midpoint in the calibration
between your brain model and your real life.
Awesome. Okay, I'm gonna go to read some questions in the chat, if whatever you want to say or answer or we'll just however you see. Okay.
Bert asks, is inactivism exclusive to internal representations?
I always think of it that way. Inactivism is generally the idea that you don't need internal
representations. You can just sort of do something.
And in simple cases, you can in that simple clam case, the clam case only has to know what are the three
thresholds at which he has to switch over from open to closed.
And that's an activist.
I think an activist is usually hostile to internal representations, and they are in opposition.
And what I'm saying is the requirement equation tells you which circumstances one is right,
and which circumstances the other is right.
Awesome. One other free energy principle paper that this reminded me of, and I'll go back to the live
chats, was by Jelle Brunberg and others in 2018, The Anticipating Brain is Not a Scientist, The Free Energy Principle
from an Ecological and Active Perspective, which discusses it's kind of like the good scientist and the good
engineer. Like it's not just the pure sense-making imperative when action is considered. It's not
just about accuracy in action because actions have consequences in a way that the sense-making
component doesn't because the black or the gray box is set up so that the sense-making doesn't have
consequences except their action. That's that partitioning. If you explored a model with telepathy,
where there was direct consequence for internal states, then it would be basically as if that
was an external or an action state because it would just make those representations external facing.
So it's like whichever states aren't external facing are the internal ones, whichever ones are
external facing. And then those can be under, quote, no selective pressure. If they're all,
that's like a novelty type or just an open diffusion space, or it can be under strong selection pressure,
which just means that there are higher consequences for a certain distribution. But that's a distribution
that you're actually having the agent's model converge towards. And maybe the populations convert,
maybe the optimal height would be like 15 feet. And it just, there's so many other trade-offs that
that actually the population just continues to push up against five. But at least there was a way to
say, well, it only got to a third of the value, but that's the highest score is 30%.
Yeah. And that sort of approach sounds very congenial to what I'm doing. I have to read the paper. I'm
afraid I haven't read it yet. I certainly will do.
Okay. All right. Benjamin asks, how does the amalgamation of Markovian dynamics and Bayesian
theory reflect the necessity for brains in complex domains to construct internal models for better
adaptation and decision-making? How does the combination of... Markovian dynamics? Can you start
the question? Yeah. How does how you brought together... Well, I think this equation...
Okay. Sorry. This equation certainly builds in Markovian dynamics. I mean,
the probabilistic model of the states is a Markovian model. If there are certain state transitions in the
world, then those are modeled. So I believe that that's encompassing this approach. I don't know the
word Markovian changes things particularly. Okay. Benjamin asks another question. As the brain has
evolved, do we know which of these definitions of brain functions are inherent versus emergent? And how
does this potentially impact their functioning as they evolve collaboratively or independently?
Markovian dynamics. There seems to be two questions there. Can you read it again?
Yes. Oh, we have many amazing conjugate question askers. How do we know which of the definitions of
brain functions are inherent versus emergent? I think that's the first part.
Inherent versus emergent, right.
Markovian dynamics. And then how does that impact their functioning as they evolve
potentially collaboratively or independently?
Well, the requirement... I've tried to state the requirement.
You know, what brains are required to do as in the abstract and making no mention of how they've
actually evolved to do it. And that applies to brains at the very beginning of their evolution,
when they were totally unfit and they gradually got fitter by natural selection. So inherent versus
emergent. I mean, what was emergent is brains getting closer and closer to an optimum given by that
equation. The equation doesn't describe how brains are. It describes where brains are evolving towards.
So that's the first part of the question. Now, the second part of the question was a different
contrast, which was... How does that potentially impact their functioning as they evolve collaboratively
or independently? Now, collaboratively or independently, there's a huge amount of question there. I mean,
obviously, social insects, for instance, their brains work collaboratively. Is that the distinction we're
talking about? I mean, again, I think the requirement equation is applicable to social insects that don't have...
They're not so concerned about individual survival. They're concerned about survival of the genotype of the hive, if you like.
But I think the equation still applies to that. But collaboration and competition are very complicated areas to analyze.
Well, definitely, especially next time, I look forward to going very deep into the insect questions.
I'll give some thoughts, though. I mean, to the first half, inherent versus emergent, without just saying it depends on how you define it.
It can be emergent through development that certain functions arise. So that can be both inherent features.
That was the sense of the question. Was it emergent in a lifetime?
I don't know what the sense of the question is. Maybe I didn't get that right. Certainly.
Emergent in a lifetime. Yeah.
Because it's optimizing a lifetime fitness, you have to consider different periods in the lifetime and
whether the brain gets fit in adulthood by having learnt along the way or having inherent innate traits is a choice that brains have.
As I said, the requirement equation can be applied to learning.
And that's a very interesting application. I haven't talked about it at all here, but it can be.
And there's a result, a book from Anderson in 1990, which shows that data on animal conditioning,
the sort of rats and pigeons in cages and so on, agrees very well with the Bayesian model,
the requirement equation model of how what the best possible learning is.
So that's another domain in which the Bayesian assumptions are confirmed.
So, interesting. This is making me wonder about abiotic constraints and biotic constraints for the requirements equation.
So, maybe one setting is that the external environment of the organism is very harsh.
Like, it's a desert ant colony.
And so, a lot of the selective pressure and the differences amongst colonies, like in their persistence or their survival,
is related to their performance against the environment.
And there's another setting where maybe the environment is materially abundant, but then there's a lot of dynamics like game theory and sexual selection and like these internal...
So, how does the requirements equation... I mean, if we have to change that as often as the weather changes,
then what are we really getting by just setting this local requirement, which itself could be changing all the time, or variable across settings?
That's a great question. I mean, in principle, the requirement equation takes as its starting point natural selection, not sexual selection.
But sexual selection, as you know, doesn't make animals... doesn't always make animals fitter.
And sometimes makes them less fit, as in the peacock's tail.
And I've got a whole separate interest in how sexual selection is acted on the human brain, particularly.
And in terms of social and sexual competition.
And that, I think, the requirement equation is not a result of that.
The requirement equation is what you get after natural selection.
What do you mean after natural selection?
Well, natural selection.
You have to have the fittest possible.
The fittest possible animal is one that survives to adulthood with the greatest probability and gets a mate with the greatest probability.
Getting a mate with the greatest probability is not as simple as surviving with the greatest probability,
because it's a competitive activity.
And you get positive feedback effects.
For instance, as in the classic peacock case, where female peacocks prefer males with long tails.
And so that gets baked into the genotype by a kind of conspiracy between female genes preferring long tails and male genes having long tails.
And you can have similar things like that happening inside the brain.
And I have a whole separate set of ideas, which I would love to give a talk about sometime.
That human language is actually a consequence of sexual selection.
Perhaps we could live stream that sometime.
But human language hasn't made us more fit in natural habitats.
There's some controversy for you.
Wow.
So, to return to one other potentially interesting aspect of Benjamin's question there, with the second half, collaborative or independent challenges.
So, this made me think about how the factorization of the problem to be solved, like the sparsity of what depends on what in the problem,
may be very disjoint from what is connected to what in the organism.
So, that's kind of widely been recognized by evolutionary constraints or just evolutionary or trait architectures.
In spandals.
Yeah.
If there's a covariance in the niche between two factors and then that is not the case in the organism, then there can be like separated movement of those traits.
Or you can have the opposite setting, where two things are, I mean, there's also pieces that are correlated just like having length and volume.
Like having a longer body leads other traits to change.
I would guess that in terms of physical evolution of bodies, you can get two traits that have to be correlated, like long legs inevitably correlated with something else.
But in terms of evolution of the brain, it's not so constrained.
And you can have different cognitive functions that evolve independent of each other.
Much, much more freedom there.
That's just a guess.
Yeah.
That's very interesting.
And the kind of, there's a lot to say about that.
Yeah.
And also with, um, very fruitful to consider the differences with the mammal nervous system and with the insect nervous system and the ways in which the insect nervous system helps clarify certain sensory mappings that get very lost in the large mammal brain.
Yeah.
I agree.
Insects are very worth looking at.
Um, okay.
So anyone else can write questions in the live chat, but I mean, what other directions would you like to explore?
How do you think this moves forward given where it is now?
Well, as I say, I'd be very interested in, if anybody's interested in taking an active inference model and kind of trying to calibrate it this way, I'd be very happy to work with them too.
I would do the requirement equation side of things.
And, uh, that'd be a very interesting comparison for me to make.
Hmm.
But, um, say we're going to make the next live stream in a, in a month's time.
And that's be about spatial cognition.
That's the main direction I want to take this.
Yes.
Moving things, animals with spatialized nervous systems, and then also nervous systems that enable movement, but don't necessarily need to be spatialized.
Like a worm may just have a topological or a tactile mapping, but it may not need to have the kinds of echolocation or center place foraging components of a bat or a bee.
I agree.
I agree.
Um, am I allowed to play with Robert's equation?
Is that okay?
Of course you are.
Of course you are.
Okay.
Um, all right.
So this is very cool.
It sounds like in around one month, we will have a session on insect brain and foraging spatial cognition.
And then there's probably many other things we can continue to talk about.
And also it would be awesome if, um, somebody has a active inference model or some other kind of model that they could reach out to you and try to get some more empirical and specific.
Have you applied this to any specific like empirical or published cases yet?
So people could see like what the kind of analysis is?
Um, well, the main analysis is coming in the second live stream.
Can I just, um, can I just, uh, move to the slide that, um, shows where you can get hold of the paper?
Yes.
So there is the link to get hold of the papers.
Yeah.
Uh, and there's an application which we'll look at next time as well, but there's a very, um, interesting video game slash executable simulation.
Um, base language.org base language.org.
Cool.
All right.
Thank you very much, Robert.
Thanks to everyone for the comments, the questions and chat.
All right.
Okay.
Great.
Thanks.
Farewell.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.

## gMPa_xoOctU

Hello and welcome. It is June 3rd, 2024. We're in Active Inference Guest Stream 82.2 with Robert
Warden. Today we're going to be discussing three-dimensional spatial cognition,
bees and bats. So thank you, Robert, for joining again. To you for the presentation and looking
forward to it. Thanks, Dan. Okay, well, as Dan said, I'm talking about three-dimensional spatial
cognition in small animals, particularly like bees and bats, for examples. And what I'm going to be
doing is showing you a demonstration program that does this. And so you can find the demonstration
program at this link at the bottom of the picture, and you can download it and try it yourself. Or you
can read a couple of papers about this work, which are there on archive at that address.
So that is the introduction. Let's get straight into it. What this work represents, I think,
is a challenge for classical neuroscience. And by classical neuroscience, I mean the assumption
that all that happens in the brain, all cognition, is done by neurons connecting to each other by
synapses and so on. And the challenge, which I think comes out of this work, is that the main result
is that neurons are actually not capable of that. They cannot represent three-dimensional space
because they're too imprecise and too slow. So the resulting challenge for neuroscience is to show
this idea is wrong. Everybody thinks it's wrong. Everybody thinks neurons do everything.
So you have to show it's wrong by building a working model of neural computation model of 3D space and
checking that it really scales and can perform somewhat like animals perform. I think just writing
papers and talking about it is not enough. You actually got to build a model and show it works.
And for building that model, the FEP neural process model is the best starting point, I believe.
So that's where this talk is going. It gets there by
of 3D spatial cognition. So what is that?
Spatial cognition, as I first say, is a very important problem.
The primary task of any animal brain is to control its movements, physical movements, its limbs, in 3D.
And that's a 3D problem. And it has to do that at all times of the day.
And for most animals, most of their brain is devoted to this problem.
And we believe, being Bayesians, that they do this by building and using Bayesian maximum likelihood model
of three-dimensional space.
And my previous live stream was about the subject, how animals build models in general.
But the particular 3D model of space, that's been important since the Cambrian era,
when animals first started having precise sense data, like good eyes and capable limbs.
And that there's been huge and sustained selection pressure on all animal species since then to do it well.
And what we believe is that animals do do it rather well.
For instance, our own conscious awareness of 3D space must come from something going on in our brains.
And that is a rather precise model in our conscious awareness of 3D space around us.
So that must be quite a good model of space in our heads.
And going from us to small insects, even a small insect can land very skillfully on the room of a coffee cup or any other surface.
So that's why I say modeling 3D spatial cognition is the top priority for neuroscience.
And we may look at all sorts of problems in neuroscience.
This is the one.
This is the heart of the problem, the thing we really need to get right.
So how do you do it?
How do animals build a 3D model of local space around them?
And the immediate problem is that most of their sense data in their vision is two-dimensional.
So how do you get from two-dimensional vision to three-dimensional model of space?
There are some constraints.
And people obviously think of stereopsis, two eyes where you can tell the depth of things, or proprioception and touch.
But those constraints only apply to restricted regions of the space around an animal.
So for the rest of it, what I believe animals do is they build a model of space around them by moving in space.
And this is a form of active inference, if you like, that you have to move in space to find out about space.
And this is based on a very strong Bayesian probability that as animals move, most of the things around it do not move.
So the world is like a big, rigid, moving body around the animal.
So the animal can compute object locations by what is called structure from motion, SFM.
And when you build a computational model of this, it's actually a fairly simple computation to do.
What you can do is fairly simple 3D matrix operations to maximize the likelihood of an object being in a certain position.
And that's what this program does.
But if you're doing that, shape from motion, structure from motion, it requires a short-term spatial memory, a working memory, positions of things.
And that's what this demonstration program does.
So the demonstration program...
B is on without vision.
With some limited, but not very bad resolution.
Bats have echo location instead.
That gives them both the echo delay and it gives them a Doppler shift.
And we'll talk about that later.
So both of those animals move fast among static objects.
So this 3D shape from motion is an applicable way of working out where the objects are.
So the program we're going to show you builds a 3D model of space in three different ways.
Firstly, it can build an optimal Bayesian shape from model.
And that is what I call a brute force calculation.
I've discussed this in my previous live stream.
And it's very hard for animals to do.
It's not the way we think animals do it.
But the interesting thing about it is it gives you the very best possible Bayesian model based on the sense data.
So that's the first way.
The second way is by dynamical object tracking where an animal makes an estimate of where each object is in three dimensions.
And then it keeps updating that estimate every time.
From every step along the track it takes, it updates that estimate from its sense data.
From its sense data.
And the third model is doing that same object tracking, but doing it in the presence of neural memory noise.
I should say this computational model is built at Mars level, David Mars level two.
That is, it's not a neural implementation, but I have made it so that you can add simulated neural noise to it.
So if you want to see this program after you've seen demonstrated, download it from this web address and you can quite simply unzip it and start it running.
So I will now switch to demonstrating this program.
So I end the show.
And there is the program.
That's what it looks like.
And what you see is three different windows, left, center and right.
The left hand window is going to be a three dimensional view of some space in which a bee or a bat is moving.
The center view is always just help information.
And it's tries to tell you how to use all these sliders and buttons and controls.
And the right hand view is just various graphs.
And we'll see some of those as we go along.
So what happens when you press the start button is you see some three dimensional space.
And inside it there on the left hand side is an animal, this time a bee.
And the colored circles are objects randomly spaced in that space.
And so the lines going from the bee to the objects are lines of sight.
And this is a three dimensional view.
So you can rotate it, see the three dimensions.
And that's what happens when you rotate it.
The objects rotate.
And so there at the moment we've got nothing about the bee's internal model of space.
We've only got actual space itself shown in the view.
In order to show the bee's internal model of space, we press the run button.
And I'll do this and you can see what happens.
So as you press run, the bee starts moving.
That's the green line.
It gets new lines of sight.
And from the new lines of sight, it estimates the positions of all those objects.
So I'll restart and do that again.
And what you'll see this time is that the estimates of the positions appear as small circles with
error bars.
So the error bars are the gray lines, the small circles are where the bee thinks the object
is.
So you can see the bee is building rather an accurate model of where the objects are from
its sense data.
I'll restart again.
And this time we'll step through it one step at a time to see how the bee's model of space
evolves with time.
So one step.
And you can see in the very early steps, we'll rotate it a bit to show what's going on.
So the bee starts making really quite good estimates of where the objects are.
Each little white circle is quite close to the blue circle, but the estimates have error
bars.
And the error bars are in three dimensions, showing the uncertainty of the location estimate in
all those dimensions.
So those estimates of position that enable the bee to move where it wants to do.
Suppose these are flowers.
It can go to the flowers and get pollen or whatever it wants to do.
Now, I said the program computes three different kinds of model.
And these three models is always doing this as you go through the steps on the track.
And these three models are a full Bayesian model.
And that's what we're showing at the moment.
Full Bayesian.
We can switch to a tracking model.
That's the object dynamic tracking.
And there, if I switch that, you can see the error bars and the objects hardly move at all.
They do move a little bit.
But this is one result of the program that doing that tracking model, which is simpler to do
them, the full Bayesian model, gives you nearly the same estimates and same error bars.
And the third model it computes is a tracking model with noise.
And I switch to this one.
And again, it's not moving very much, actually.
But I'll move it on a bit.
And you'll see that noisy tracking often is very different from tracking without noise.
So we're on tracking without any noise at the moment.
We step forward a bit.
And the bee keeps updating its estimates of these positions as they go.
And I now switch from tracking to noisy tracking.
And you can see the noisy tracking is significantly worse than tracking.
The noisy estimates have drifted away from the true positions of the object.
That is really the second.
I'm running this with a fairly small level of neural noise.
You can adjust the level of neural noise.
You can adjust the bee's visual acuity.
You can adjust all sorts of things using these sliders and try running the program again.
This is running with a fairly small level of noise.
So I keep stepping.
And the noisy tracking estimate keeps getting worse.
But I go back to the tracking estimate.
The tracking estimate without neural noise is pretty much dead on.
So I'll restart again.
And I'll run again.
Because then we can show the graph at the end of the run.
And I'll run again.
So if I run again.
So if I run again.
Now you look at the graph on the right.
And what that is doing is comparing tracking, which is the black curve, versus noisy tracking,
which is the red curve.
And these are steps along the bee's track.
Those are the same steps we saw there.
But these vertical axis is the level of error in the depth of the bee estimates.
And you can see that tracking is rather small errors.
It homes in on true positions of the object.
Whereas with memory noise, you get much bigger errors.
And in fact, the errors are very unpredictable.
If you rerun.
We'll just rerun it again.
You find that the errors coming from noisy tracking, they do seem to vary quite a lot from
one run to the next.
Noisy tracking is pretty unpredictable, basically.
So there the errors have gone right up and they've come down again.
Whereas ordinary tracking without noise is nice convergence towards the true positions.
So that is really the second key result of the simulation.
That is that a tracking model is a realistic model of how animals estimate positions of things
around them.
But if you add noise to it, even adding a small amount of noise completely messes up
the tracking model.
Now there are more things you can show with this model.
You can show, for instance, how animals use their model to detect what is moving around
them.
Because obviously when an animal is moving, it is quite hard for it to detect motion from
its visual field.
Because when it's moving, everything is moving in this visual field.
So it has to use the three dimensional model to work out what is actually moving.
And if you also plot the efficiency of motion detection, you find that too is very much poorer
when you add memory noise.
So I think I'll stop at this point.
The program also does a simulation of bats, but I won't step straight into that.
Perhaps we could come back to that at the end of the talk if somebody wants to hear about
it.
But for the moment, let's just step back and find what we have concluded from the bees model.
Now, where is my presentation?
Now, I've got to resume the presentation.
How do I do that?
Yeah, we get back to the presentation.
So the key points that I think I may have shown you is that in the 3D view, you can see the
track of the animal.
You can see its lines of sight.
You can see, sorry, my phone is ringing.
I better go and shoot it up.
I've shown you the three.
I've shown you where the real objects are.
Those are the circles, the coloured circles.
I've shown you the objects as located in the internal model.
I've shown you shape from motion.
I've shown you what the error bars are.
And you can rotate the 3D view.
I've shown you the three different models of 3D space, the full Bayesian model, the dynamic
object tracking model, and the tracking model with memory errors.
As I say, when you run this program, you can change all sorts of parameters to see how it's
sensitive to the parameters.
And I've shown you the bees spatial model.
I've shown you how the error bars are, particularly the depth dimension.
And I've shown you how memory noise degrades the model.
So here are the key results.
The best possible model any animal could build from its sensitivity is a very good model.
And in fact, it's more precise than the sensitivity, because if the animal can assume that objects
don't move, then over time, an animal can build a very good understanding of where objects are, better than its raw sense data.
Animals can't do any better than that.
But dynamical object tracking works pretty well.
It's almost as good as the full Bayesian model.
And it only works if spatial memory has very high precision.
And I didn't say the levels of precision that I put into the program, which start to spoil the tracking model,
there are about one part in a hundred.
And that, I believe, is much more precise than most neural representations of space can give.
So that's the next part of this talk.
How do we do that modeling with a neural model of the brain, the classical neural model?
So how do you build a neural spatial memory?
And this is a changed quote from Animal Farm, where they said two legs bad, four legs good.
Two dimensions is easy.
Three dimensions is hard.
Because two dimensions, you can easily do a sheet of neurons representing two dimensions.
Whereas in three dimensions, you don't have that option.
And there are several possible memory designs.
You can have a two-dimensional sheet of neurons and you can represent the third dimension by depth.
Depth by the third.
Yeah, you can have some other variable representing depth.
Or you can have a three-dimensional clump of neurons where
positioning the clump represents a 3D position.
Or you can represent all three dimensions of an object position by neural firing rates.
Now, none of these work well for object tracking.
I think we can quite simply eliminate the 3D clump model.
But the other two models have a problem with neural error rates.
And if neural information is encoded as firing rates of neurons,
typically you have a neuron firing n times in some time interval t.
And then the precision with which it can represent some real quantity is of the order of one part in square root of n.
Now, n over t is typically 5 or 50, between 5 and 50 pulses per second on most animal brains.
But for insects and small mammals, the time they've got to have to update their internal model of space is very small.
Typically less than a tenth of a second.
So if the time is a tenth of a second, you get n less than 10.
And that gives you errors of the order of 30%, which are much bigger than the 1% errors,
which I said are needed for tracking structure from motion.
So the conclusion of this is that the neurons, when they represent space,
there's a tradeoff between speed and precision.
The faster you have, the less precise it is.
And this tradeoff is just too hard.
So I believe there is no working neural model of 3D spatial cognition.
Now, the three points in blue I've said before,
they say spatial cognition is very important and animals do it well.
And we've had this problem for a long time.
In his book Vision 40 years ago, David Ma identified the challenge and he started work on it.
He defined what he called a 2.5D sketch and various other models.
Now, I believe that in terms of building neural models of how spatial cognition works,
people have really not moved beyond this.
Why?
I think the main reason is that the memory problem is just too hard.
The memory gives them too big errors and is too slow.
And I suspect that over the years, there have been many people who look at this problem
and they decide to move on and do something else instead.
But the result is that spatial cognition is the central problem of neuroscience.
We don't have a model of it.
And so this is rather like theory of planetary motion without a sun
or a theory of the atom with no nucleus.
So how does this relate to active vision?
I think active vision is one way to explore this problem.
Active vision describes how a 3D spatial model can be inferred from vision.
And there are quite a few papers on it.
They've focused on various aspects of it.
They focused on 2D scene classification.
They focused on the trade-offs between various objectives like the choice of visual saccades.
They focused on 3D robotics.
As far as I know, none of them have really focused on how animal brains practically build a 3D model.
And I believe that existing active vision models do not address the issue of neural error rates.
One reason for this is that the standard active inference toolkit in MATLAB, I believe it doesn't model neural error rates.
It assumes, I believe, an abstract perfect neuron with very precise representation of quantities.
And error rates are actually not an issue for many of these applications.
They're not an issue for robotics.
And they're not an issue really for making discrete choices.
But as I've said in this talk so far, the accuracy of the 3D model really matters.
And neural error rates are the big problem.
If we set that problem on one side for a moment, there is the issue of active inference trade-offs.
And there are many interesting trade-offs you can examine in active vision.
And the key trade-off, I believe, is one between freezing and moving.
So, as I've shown in the demonstration, the animal has to move in order to infer the 3D positions and things are rounded by shape from motion.
It also, of course, has to move to achieve practical goals like feeding and fleeing and mating and so on.
On the other hand, it can freeze and freezing it may conserve energy.
It may be able to detect what's moving simply directly from its visual field, which is much
easier, and it may itself avoid detection.
So these are very key trade-offs.
They're absolutely essential for lifetime fitness for many animals.
Animals have to make this trade-off or these trade-offs any moment of the day.
And so we've got plenty of empirical data about it, and I think it'll be a very useful area to
explore.
Now I'm going to switch to something completely different.
Having said that neural storage of spatial positions is a very hard problem,
I'm going to talk about an alternative, a possible alternative way of storing spatial data.
And so if you assume there's some round region inside the brain of a fairly large diameter D,
and this holds waves with a minimum wavelength, which I call lambda, and the neurons can couple to the
waves both as transmitters and receivers, and the wave can persist at least for fractions of a second.
So the wave can act as a working memory for positions.
And the number of object positions you can store in the wave can be up to D over lambda cube, and that can be a very large number.
The spatial precision which one object position is stored can be one part in D over lambda, and I think that D over lambda can be very large.
So you can easily get precision better than one part in 100, which is what you need to build the spatial model.
So in summary, wave storage of 3D positions may have a lot of computational benefits.
It can give a natural fit to the problem.
It can give high precision and high capability.
It can give you very fast response times, low spatial distortion, and some other benefits which are described in the papers.
So apart from its computational benefits, is there any evidence for wave storage in the brain?
I believe there are two quite powerful lines of evidence, one of which comes from the insect central body.
The central body of the insect brain is a very small part of the brain in the middle of it,
and it consists of a fan-shaped body and the elliptical body.
And it has this shape which is remarkably well conserved across all insect species.
And there's an insect brain database, and I've gone to the insect brain database and pulled from it.
The shapes of the central body from a few typical insect species.
And here you can see the fan-shaped body and the elliptical body.
And it's very constant across all kinds of insects.
And you can see it's approximately a round shape.
So it's well suited to hold three-dimensional waves.
And it does multi-sensory integration.
And so it's quite likely, quite probable, that it holds spatial positions.
And insects have very few neurons in their brain to do it in any other way.
And what I think is significant is how constant and round the insect central body is compared with
all the other parts of the insect brain.
So that's one piece of evidence from the insect central body.
The other piece of evidence comes from the mammalian thalamus.
As you may know, the thalamus of most mammals, all mammals, is approximately spherical
and is connected to all sense data and all cortical regions.
But the important thing is that the shape of the thalamus
is highly conserved across all species.
And there's an important aspect of the thalamus anatomy
that unless you assume a wave, really doesn't make sense.
Because the thalamus consists of a number of independent nuclei, like the Polvinar and the LGN
and so on and so forth. And the connections across within the thalamus between these nuclei
are very weak or even non-existent.
So you could have this picture here that the thalamus...
Where's my pointer?
Here's my pointer.
The thalamic nuclei, which are white circles here, they all connect in two ways to the cortex,
but they don't connect to each other.
So one thalamic nucleus here could easily start moving out towards the cortex.
And the length of its axons could decrease.
And there's other connections. It doesn't need other connections.
So all the nuclei could migrate outward towards the cortex.
And you could still have the same neural synaptic connectivity and the same
computational capability if neurons only compute by synaptic computation.
So this way you could save a lot of energy in shorter axon lengths.
So in summary, a compact thalamus only makes sense if all the nuclei need to be immersed in the same wave.
So we now have three pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain.
Firstly, there's the computational neuroscience.
That is a very difficult problem to build a 3D model about it.
But you can build a 3D spatial model if you assume there's a wave storing positions.
Secondly, the insect central body is nearly round in all insects, very well suited to hold a wave.
And it appears to be in the right part of the brain to do that.
And thirdly, the mammalian thalamus, which again has this round shape, very well suited to hold a wave.
And the important thing here is that without a wave, the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't make sense.
So I would like you, if you remember only one thing about this talk, remember this slide.
There is quite a lot of evidence for a wave in the brain.
One thing I will say is that the wave is probably not an electromagnetic wave,
because there's quite a lot of interest in electromagnetic fields in the wave from researchers
like Miller and McFadden and so on.
But an electromagnetic field can't play the role that this wave is supposed to, is needed to play.
In other words, the key thing that this, the wave is supposed to do in this model is to store
information for a fraction of a second.
But an electromagnetic field in the wave, and there certainly are, in the brain,
there certainly are electromagnetic fields in the brain.
They cannot store information for fractions of a second,
and they cannot represent 3D space like a hologram.
And just to say a little more about this, if there's an electromagnetic wave in the brain,
it has to obey Maxwell's equations.
So the wavelength times the frequency is equal to speed of light, lambda f equals c.
And that means that 40 hertz, typical frequencies of these waves, the wavelength is 8,000 kilometers
as large as half the Earth.
So the conclusion is that at 40 hertz, electromagnetic field is not a wave, it's a static field,
and it's driven entirely by neuron firing.
So it doesn't store the information.
So in summary, we're looking for something not electromagnetic, and possibly some quantized
excitation, something a bit exotic in the field of quantum biology.
I think we shouldn't despair here because we know evolution is a lot smarter than we are
discovering these things and exploiting them.
So here are some take-home questions.
Does 3D spatial cognition use a wave in the brain?
In other words, in the light of the evidence I've shown you,
what is the Bayesian probability of that hypothesis being true?
Now, I say these take-home questions because I didn't expect you to have an answer immediately,
but perhaps you'd like to look at the papers and see all the evidence
is and try and assess it in your own mind.
So what is the reason?
What is the reason?
What is the reason?
And how do brains compute space?
How do neurons on their own represent 3D space with enough precision?
On the other hand, if there might be a wave in the brain,
wouldn't that be a rather exciting and revolutionary development?
It would actually change the whole of neuroscience,
and it could address this central unsolved problem of how spatial cognition takes place.
So I believe that possibility should be explored, particularly for young researchers.
This is attractive.
It's greenfield research.
It's not a well-trodden path of classical neuroscience.
The classical neuroscience model of McCulloch-Pitt's neurons and Hebbian synapses,
that's 75 years old now.
So I would like to encourage people to get out and explore.
Or again, come back to the earlier slide here, a crisis in neuroscience.
The result of this work, I think, is that neurons can't represent 3D space
because they're too imprecise and too slow.
So the crisis is, can you show this is wrong?
Can you show it by building a working neural computational model and checking its scales properly?
So the FEP neural process model is the starting point for that.
I think it's a good problem to work on because it is a crisis and big advances in science tend to come out of crises.
So what I'm advocating, and this is my last slide, is a twin-track research program
to build two different active vision models of 3D spatial cognition.
One is a pure neural model, which is a classic FEP neural process model.
Can this be made to work?
Or are the neural memory errors going to kill it?
And secondly, to try to build a hybrid wave and neural model.
And when you're building those models, we can explore the trade-offs that active inference is so good at computing,
and particularly the trade-off between freezing and moving.
So there are a couple of candidate projects for the Active Inference Institute.
Okay, that's it.
Awesome.
Thank you, Robert.
I have some questions, and some people have asked questions in the live chat, so I'll ask them.
So first, just while I'm re-cropping everything, how would you connect this to the requirements equation earlier work?
Because you mentioned that there was a requirements equation-driven calibration of the optimal navigation.
So what does that look like to have the optimal navigation according to the requirements equation?
Well, to summarize on the requirements equation, you can model how brains evolve.
And this is the previous live stream.
And you can show that they evolve towards making a purely Bayesian calculation of their best model of the world from the sense data.
But that purely Bayesian calculation is rather expensive.
And it's been well known in FEP that full Bayesian calculations is intractable for most animals.
And so that is a very expensive calculation.
And it's probably not the way animals do it.
But it is.
It can be done on digital computers.
And it can be done in this model I've showed you.
And the first model, the full Bayesian model, is actually computing the requirement equation from the bees or the bats sense data.
And the second model, the tracking model, is an approximation to that, which is a lot cheaper, but seems to give very nearly the same results.
Okay, awesome.
Let us dive into a few mammal and insect neuroanatomy questions.
So I'll start with a set of questions from the live chat.
This is going to be about mammal neuroanatomy.
Okay.
Okay.
Tim Ritter asks, do you assume this wave property for all thalamic nuclei, primary and secondary, or for specific ones, e.g. pulvinar or mediodorsal?
Very good question.
I don't know the answer.
I mean, at this stage, I believe the whole thalamus is around spherical, near spherical volume with the wave going through all of it.
So they are all immersed in that same wave.
So even the pulvinar, the pulvinar certainly is, even the LGN, which is rather small and is a pass through nucleus.
I think they all are.
So I think, for instance, I think people always say the thalamus is a relay.
Sensata gets to the cortex by thalamus.
But people don't have a very good reason why it has to go through these relays, nuclei, in order to get there.
I think it's doing something about locating about, I think the wave has some involvement there, but this is very early days.
I don't know the answer at all.
Okay.
Another question from Tim on mammalian neuroanatomy.
What about 2D orientation?
Would you expect similar waves in hippocampal instead of thalamic regions?
Or is 2D sufficiently easy to get by without?
Yeah, basically, I believe 2D is easy enough to get by.
And the hippocampus is by no means suitable to hold a wave.
They have all sorts of, hippocampi have all sorts of different shapes.
So.
Yes, I think that was a core theme between the mammal and insect areas is the conserved shape.
And then also the allometric differences over evolution, where the size differential of the insect central body changes much less than other primary sensory regions.
And that was in your paper.
Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
And that kind of implies that that small size of the central body, it's only a few percent of the whole insect brain, seems to be enough.
Yeah.
And that the properties which it hosts or enables might be related to its physical extent or like to its surface area, it's a volume ratio and not a function.
Like, for example, in the antenna lobe where the olfactory information are coming in, there are these little glomeruli and different species have from several tens to several hundred of these olfactory glomeruli.
Like ants have many, like ants have many, and they have more olfactory receptors in their genome, and they have more olfactory glomeruli in that region.
Or insects with more compound eye sections, they have larger optic lobes.
So the primary sensory regions have very large variation amongst species.
But then as you get into the central body, you get much more conserved anatomy and size.
And then the mushroom body on the top part of the brain is something a little bit in between that might have more of an analogy to like mammalian cortex, where there actually is the possibility to scale its cognitive capacities through size changes, because it has some kind of like repetitive or stereotyped layout.
So, yeah, I mean, there are a load of fascinating questions in neuroanatomy, which relate to this.
And if you pursue this hypothesis, then there's always interesting questions.
I'm not an expert on insect or mammalian neuroanatomy, but there's a load of interesting questions in there.
Cool. So about the bee spatial cognition.
So we know that bees use a variety of visual cues ranging from the landmark and the landscape recognition to polarization of light and so on.
And also, as you pointed out, the central body does multisensory integration.
So how do we think about the possibly complementary or redundant information provided by these different aspects of the visual fields?
And what does your simulation focus in on?
Well, I mean, I believe that what the central body and the thalamus both do is multisensory integration.
In other words, animals should they they need to make the best 3D model of space they can and they need to use all their sensitive to use it apart from possibly smell.
That's an interesting question. And so both of them do multisensory integration.
And ideally, one would put in a simulation. One would have things like stereopsis.
One would have object recognition. One would have light polarization, all sorts of sources.
So this program only does simple vision or simple echolocation at the moment, but it should do all multicensory integration in a single Bayesian maximum likelihood model of the whole.
All sensitive coming in at the moment.
Interesting. Yeah, with sounds or with smells, it would be interesting to see how those come into play.
And how do you think about in in the simulations presented here, egocentric and allocentric navigation?
Because you mentioned how the kind of simplifying assumption is that the world is a rigid fixed body.
So you could have these kind of duality where like I'm moving and the world is fixed and then there's sort of like I'm fixed and the world is moving.
So how does that relate to that question to that egocentric, allocentric distinction?
Yeah, very good question. I mean, I think the frame of reference used for the model should be as much allocentric as it can be because the wave has to persist.
And if the wave just persists, it represents an object at a constant position.
So you want to have a frame of reference where most objects are at constant positions.
So I think that makes it allocentric.
But obviously it has to change from time to time.
Every few seconds it has to switch because it can't just stay allocentric.
Hmm. Interesting. So now to connect that to what you brought up about move or stay that kind of fundamental animal or fundamental mobile organismal nervous system question.
I thought about different body plans where the eyes or the visual component are unable to move separately from the body like a bee could turn its body, but it can't rotate its eyes.
Whereas in humans, for example, we have optic saccade.
So there that stay or move. Yes, we have turning our posture and moving through space.
But also we see like this microcosm where when the gaze is fixed, there's high precision and then movement in the world is associated with movement of objects.
And then whereas when a eye saccade is dispatched during the saccade, our visual attention is alleviated.
And then it's because during that time, all the movement of pixels essentially is ascribed to the movement of the eye.
So we see kind of like a microcosm of the two modes of movement and stability in motion detection in the saccading.
But for other organisms that don't have eye saccade, the only way that they can get that kind of alternating movement and stability is by moving their body.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I always think of eye saccades as particularly predators, if you like, that want some high resolution in some direction, some particular direction.
Whereas for most insects, as you say, that there is not the option of a high resolution fovea.
But I think of saccades as being cheap.
I mean, the freeze move trade off is a real trade off.
If an animal moves, it can be detected as moving and it can't detect motion itself as well as if it's stationary.
So that's a real hard trade off an animal has to make.
Whereas saccades, you can make them cheaply whenever you like.
Yes. Yes. And also, it's really interesting, like how often the behavioral studies just look at the direction of movement.
But there's this whole timing of movement.
And so there's definitely a lot of empirical studies about whether fear based movements like in a predator prey or different kinds of movement choices.
Where would you say attention comes into play in the sense that the bee or the bat was just kind of taking it all in?
It didn't have like some restricted scope.
So that's kind of like a uniform attention across objects and across space and time.
But then we know that we do have this visual attention phenomena.
Well, yeah, attention is very important.
And I think naively, it's a search line model of attention.
In other words, the wave representation of all space represents all the space around an animal.
But the animal can focus attention on a region of the space.
And what that's doing is tuning the receptors in the thalamus.
So they are sensitive to wave vectors in a certain region.
So there's a whole load of issues there about how the wave works as to whether it can, how signals are rooted from sensitive inputs to specialist regions of the cortex.
And I think attention is that routing of information.
So again, loads of big questions there.
So this is kind of this kind of ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
differently changes the the the the resting shape of the wave and then that opens up like you're now
suggesting recurrent connections or or other connections into that wave hosting region
recurrent connections can modify the shape of the wave potentially and then also the oh yeah the
resting shape of the wave can route or augments or suppress other sensory information coming in
that'd be like water kind of dumping to where there's already a high water point
versus water going to where there's low water yeah yeah i mean i think key role of the wave is to
persist a background model of all 3d space and then against that background model new center information
that comes in particularly movement uh is best evaluated a piece of new sense data you evaluate
it much better if you compare and contrast it with what you had before that is attention
and it it's it's the thalamus if you like telling the cortex here pay attention to here here's your
old information from this place in space here's your new information so tell me what's changed
well this connection with frame differencing is very powerful predictive processing predictive coding
algorithms were built by computer scientists and and compression engineers looking to make video
compression work and doing the frame differencing because that's the optimal way to compress video
and then that got brought also back into neuroscience where there's a lot of focus on things like edge
detection and these other 2d visual phenomena and then as you're pointing to there's this kind of sun at
the solar system's center that's not really being discussed which is like okay yes we have neurons in
different visual regions that are excitable by vertical lines by diagonal lines and so on
but this is all flat phenomena and the question of not just shape recognition but the question that's most
proximally relevant for movement and the fitness related decisions for the organism in the niche
has to do with its spatial navigation not it's like eyesight at the eye doctor yeah
not only spatial navigation how it moves its limbs you know how where it puts it for its footnecks that sort
of thing and the 3d model i think does all of that okay i'll read a question from the live chat
how might the saccade relate to a matrix of inputs versus a human-based visual system movement on the
matrix may give different spatial dynamics
uh i'm not sure what we mean by matrix of inputs there but um as you said during a saccade visual input
is kind of blocked while the eye is getting from a to b uh whereas the wave persists and the 3d spatial
model stays constant and after a saccade the eye has to update the 3d spatial model in some different
place so um i'm not i don't think i've answered the question but perhaps you what do you understand my matrix
it's what you enter um it's making me think about the experiments where the for example the fruit fly
is placed on a ping pong ball in a harness in a virtual reality setting so it's getting custom visual
input and its movements on the ping pong ball just kind of scrolls the ball so it's basically fixed
but it gives a lot of degrees of experimental freedom around the um orienting of the body and what
visual inputs it gets so i wonder if anywhere there we know about the the time the time scale of
spatial orientation updating because that would be very critical to understand the nature of
the wave but if it was something that was um for example closer to the diffusion rate of ions then
we might be looking more towards like a channel or pore based hypothesis if it was something that was
faster than neural signaling it would suggest something more like the direct coupling or other kinds of of
action so what what makes you feel as you suggested that it is not an electromagnetic
stabilized wave field well as i say the physics i mean for electromagnetic wave we do understand the
physics and the electromagnetic waves that measured by eeg for instance they are a purely passive consequence of
neural activity they don't persist in the information for any time at all whereas this wave i'm talking
about has to persist information for fractions of a second so this constant spatial model is kept
persisted while the saccades go on while the animal moves while it computes shape from motion
so a pure electric field we we know the physics is maxwell's equations and it does not store energy
store information so it's purely a passive reflection of what's going on in the neurons it's not a memory
so the neurons are especially if we think about the several like thousand to tens of thousand let's say in the
the insect central body there's too few and they're too sparse and noisy to in a purely connectionist neural
framework to support the kinds of empirical results that we see on the other hand a purely field-based
approach has some issues that you just laid out so it's it's very interesting that two at least of the well-known
mechanisms the local field potential and the firing rate rate coding type models that both of them seem to have some limitations
and yet there's very strong anatomical evidence for the functional role of that region
oh yeah it's absolutely vital region um but i believe that just looking at electric fields magnetic fields in the brain
is not going to give you memory and that's the key thing that i think is needed to do structure promotion you've
got to have short-term working memory to hold a little model of space for a fraction of a second
do you see that as a kind of special type of short-term memory or do you think this is the same
memory pool that like short-term audio memory gets entered into
oh it's it's special it's different from that yeah definitely
to say it starts from how do you can how do you compute a 3d spatial model
how do you do structure promotion you need short-term working memory for that purpose specifically
interesting interesting um the kind that enables us to
check for difference in in visually changing systems or what what does this visual working memory
have
well basically it's it's not vision because it's 3d and uh checking for difference in the visual field
is you can do it quicker you can look directly at the visual field whereas this model i think the 3d model
is um it's um it's maintained by a loop between in in mammals between the thalamus and the cortex and it's a 40 hertz
cycle that maintains it so it takes time to build the 3d model and it's a bit slower than direct visual change detection
interesting it's this tension with like visual being what is seen versus kind of a broader imagine
the imagination of vision um what about action in your model so how were the paths set
yeah i said that the model was a bit like active inference and the animal has to move in order to
understand space but it's not really the program has not modeled the kind of active inference choices
of how should i move to get the best understanding of space and you could do that you could make the
bee chooses trajectory to get the best understanding of where the flowers are or you you make the bee choosers
trajectory for all sorts those are the active inference trade-offs that the program has not yet looked at
and and which can be looked at and i think are very interesting that's awesome yeah it's almost like
the bee in this situation it's like on a train trying to reduce its uncertainty about the location
of landmarks but it's just on a it's on a rail it doesn't have policy decision whereas once we start to
close that loop and ask which direction of movement or none given the costs would reduce uncertainty
about resolving this kind of spatial relationship then that that's where the perception action starts to like come into play
in benefit of each other and potentially there's several choice successive moves can greatly reduce uncertainty through active sampling
just as we see in circadian and all other situations and that would be like a heuristic or strategy that really does work
yeah i mean any another example that i use somewhere is i believe that predatory birds like hawks when they're approaching their target
they don't go in a straight line they move on a curve to reduce the uncertainty
so that they continue to get uh more information can you see the range of of the target
if they just went straight to the target they wouldn't get a range fix on it
now what about the difference between the b and the bat whereas a b is simply receiving the
the reflected photons let's just say the bat is sending out a invisible signal so how is this kind of radar
echolocation setting similar and different to the vision setting i mean it's very different i could show
you that with the program if you like um what happens with the bat is from the delay of an
for a particular insect that the bat is tracking from the delay of the echo it sees the range to the
insect so it gets the insect constrained on a sphere and it's 3d model then from the doppler shift it
actually sees the perceives the cosine of the angle between its directional movement and the direction of the
insect so what it gets there is it constrains the sphere surface of a sphere down to one circle in
space so what the bat gets is a series of circles in space which constrain the position of the insects
and i could show that on the program if you like sure okay um well how do i do that how do i share again
yeah i'm curious is the circle something like is it like a hoop that you could throw a basketball through
or is it well i'll show you if i like um now i can't get rid of this something on my screen it's the problem
um i've got a big black screen with a two on it i can't get rid of it
um end show spelling end show right now am i sharing my screen or not not yet um now how do i find where
do that how do i find where i am in space yeah
that's an interesting question also how these mechanisms are google windows somewhere
uh zoom windows somewhere and i i was zed m that'll be it how are these mechanisms repurposed for digital
navigation semantic navigation narrative navigation uh just a minute let me find oh god get away
okay oh share screen to share okay you got that we're back okay so what we do is we change from b to bat
and we start again so what you have now is the bat and several insects which are colored circles here
and what the bat has is its echolocation take the blue insect its echolocation constrains it to a sphere in
space and that's the delay of the echolocation and the doppler shift can strains the sphere down to a circle
so if you rotate these circles you see that blue insect is on a circle from one point in the bat's
trajectory so as the bat moves it gets successive circles for the same insect so what we have is the bat is
moving and all these circles highly confusing and it gradually locates all the insects better and better
but what if i restart and step again if i step of beast i've restarted right now if i step what i can do is
focus on one insect if i focus on that insect then i only see the circles from echolocation of that one insect
and i can step again and get a new circle from a new step and all the time the bat is optimizing the
position of that insect to get the best fit to all the circles it has for that insect so it's very
different from vision but it can build a very good 3d model from its echolocation okay so to kind of
confirm what's happening here there's there's for a given snapshot ping with the sonar what is returned
is a circle of equiprobable locations that are kind of like the maximum likelihood ridge that's right
constrains these are really some gaussian's gaussian donuts if you like okay and then successive pings
enable you to look at the intersection point of the circles to find out yeah through successive
approximation the likeliest location so this is what's happening here on that light blue insect
he's got these three circles and that's the most likely they're not very well intersecting but that's
the most likely intersection point that's like on this back it's it's like a gaussian mixture model
you have those three peaks and then when you summate those three peaks that the the point that
interpolates them or just is the the geometric average is the single maximum likelihood estimate
point that's exactly it yeah and again with the bat i can go from full bayesian model which is this one
full bayesian tracking or tracking with noise and again the noise tends to have nasty effect
and then i can see how the circles go so
how is this how is this similar or different than for example radar navigation algorithms for planes or ships
maps i think it's quite similar i think yeah i mean they are making maximum likelihood inferences from
radar signal
and have you with this software looked at the computational like the runtime complexity or the resource use
associated with scaling the number of insects or scaling the resolution of vision
yeah you can scale the number of insects for instance i scale up here there's 30 insects
the number of insects i can run the model with 30 insects and um it's it runs perfectly well
so the model is quite efficient because what it has to do for each object
um and for each time step it simply has to do this gaussian optimization which turns out to be just
a 3d matrix operation three with three matrices and that's very quick to do
and so that's one of the advantages of it that if animals are trying to
track a load of things around them which they probably are it's quite a quick efficient computation
but this is not the neural implementation the problem is going from here this
mars level two computational model to a neural implementation that is where i think all the
interesting problems lie at least you have have this level two model as a kind of starting point
um and the bayesian model would be trying to implement that in neurons
yes makes sense this is kind of the as if bayesian algorithmic map and the question is what proximate
mechanisms are capable of doing these algorithms functionally and neuroanatomy has basically localized
to the region in mammals and in invertebrates and so now we're in a space of winnowing possibilities
and leaving the door open for unconventional opportunities for how those regions actually
do it it's a very targeted specific agenda that that connects a first principles grounding about how
well the navigation can proceed with the requirements equation on through to the empirical patterns that
we see those empirical patterns might have some like behavioral experiments well sometimes can be hard
to interpret as well though for example there's a common experiment where a wall that's shaped like an l
is set up and then people will use it to test if an animal will go on the hypotenuse to reduce the
travel distance or whether it will take the the around the wall however even if there was a
conceptualization of the ability to move on the hypotenuse direction an animal might like prefer to move
along walls so then by the time you get to the real animals movements it's very tied up with not just
trying to be the optimal landmark resolving visual algorithm it's actually engaging in all these other
drives that can make it look like it's lower efficiency or even like supernaturally efficient on a given domain
yeah i i think there's all sorts of animal experiments one could do but interpreting them is not easy but
basically if you're looking in these experiments to to measure how good the animal's internal 3d model is
i would like to with insects for instance how good is their movement detection if it's movement in depth that
needs the 3d model to resolve it rather than just the visual field that's very interesting especially
in insects potentially where there's little overlap between their two compound eyes yeah yes um okay i'll read
a question from the chat as we kind of head towards the end use equal wrote how would perception of ability to
conceive of other domains of time as a cognitive function change spatial awareness
um other dimensions of time i'm not sure i understand that question other domains of time domains what's
other domains of time um well this is all a very short term question it's fractions of a second
and time outside that interval just doesn't come into it at all really does that answer the question you think
it might i think it might also be pointing to our awareness of how we handle our perception of time and space
and what does that open up or enable for example for our perception of space if we have a different perception
or conception of time well that is a very deep question i mean i think our perception of chronological
time the long-term time is something completely different from more anything else in the animal kingdom
i think most animals live in the moment really they're aware of what's happening right now and what they're
going to do right now and the rest just doesn't matter
whereas we exit what matters in the moments to ruminate and speculate yeah absolutely
um well what other directions or or ways are you hoping to take this work well one way that is
particularly important i think although particularly problematic is theories of consciousness
in other words consciousness most of our consciousness
consciousness at any moment is consciousness of the space around us and it seems to come from our
internal bayesian model of space around us so this work is very related to why we are conscious
and there's another paper and i'd like to give another live stream just on that subject so i think
this gives a way forward to a theory of consciousness that can be in many ways more satisfactory than we get from
purely classical neural models of the brain that's awesome i'm also personally very excited on the empirical
insect neuroanatomy side to look oh there are a huge number of ways of looking going forward i think
insects are particularly productive because you know they've got to do it with a really small number of
neurons so it's really there's a lot of experimental work on insects that can illuminate this question
yeah absolutely cool yes the brains are fun to dissect you can see it transparently all there and
no backstage there um and then also this on on the more transferable outside of entomology i think the
is this is kind of um is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known
have um done some other thing and then being able to look at realized empirical trajectories
and then break those down or look at their component loading according to safety visual
information gain other kinds of heuristics or or impulses to understand moments or kind of
fragments of trajectories like something looks to briefly resolve its uncertainty and then it
doesn't need then the the overall demand to resolve uncertainty drops again and then it continues
just with inertia and then maybe that's a very simple decision to make and then there's probably
all kinds of cool patterns and ways to go yeah there's a huge amount to investigate
another another topic by the way is we've looked at mammals we've looked at insects right at the
opposite ends of the spectrum there's a whole load of stuff in between i think octopus and squid are
particularly interesting but there's all the other species one can look at say how do they do space
they have unique bodies and different bodies but there's also bringing in there the question of
underwater or space or a fluid media and then that and a bat flies but it has the mammalian neuroanatomy
so then there could be like bird neuroanatomy with its slight differences from the mammal then
there could be this question of underwater and maybe there's some mammals that have underwater navigation
maybe dolphins would be like bats but in another fluid media
uh i hope people download the dot zip and play around
so do i
any last comments
uh
not really no i think i said it all thank you thank you robert well i i
i am greatly enjoying learning about the work and seeing about how the requirements
equation
scopes
a given problem setting and kind of puts a meter stick on whatever the inferential problem is
inference plus action problem is
and then from there the mar the marion research program is just kind of laid out you can pursue
it from the mechanistic or from the algorithmic elements but they all are connected through on one
hand in theory the requirements equation and on the other hand the empirical results that we actually see
yeah
cool so thank you again um i i come back to the fineman quote richard fineman on his blackboard it said if
you can't build it you don't understand it this is all about building it
we can't build a bug
not yet um thank you robert see you for dot three see you bye
is

## IvY4acL8YeA

Hello and welcome everyone. It's July 22, 2024. This is Active Inference Guest Stream 82.3,
the Projective Wave Theory of Consciousness. Robert Worden will give a presentation and we
have several others to join and comment and give their insights. So thank you everyone for joining
and Robert please begin the presentation. And also Robert, close the YouTube on your side.
All good.
It's coming through my loudspeaker which is a problem.
Yeah, it's all good. Like, all good.
Okay, so this is a talk about the Projective Wave Theory of Consciousness and there's already a paper about it on
the archive this month so you can look at the paper if you like. But let me start by describing roughly the roadmap for the talk.
The Projective Wave Theory is very closely related to the Projective Consciousness Model, PCM, and we're fortunate to have three of the authors of that model on the call today.
But I'm going to give this talk in four different parts. The first part is talking about data and the idea is that any theory of consciousness has to fit the data, has to fit some data in order for us to believe it.
And so the question is, what kinds of data is there about consciousness that the theory has to fit?
And I shall be arguing that the main kind of data we have is spatial consciousness.
So that's part one of the talk. Part two, I shall talk about the Projective Consciousness Model, PCM.
And to my mind, the big virtue of the PCM is that it does predict, account for just that, the spatial nature of consciousness.
And in that, it's a great deal, it does a great deal better than many neural theories of consciousness.
And I shall probably pause at that point after parts one and two and have discussion about the first two points there.
But before that, I think the PCM has great strengths, but I think in common with all neural theories of consciousness, it has three problems.
And I shall talk about what those problems are.
But I shall emphasize that those problems are not specific to the PCM.
If you buy into the classical neural model of the brain that neurons do everything, then whatever your theory of consciousness, I think you're going to have these problems.
And so in order to get out of those problems, we have to do something that's not in the classical neural model that assumes that neurons in the brain do everything.
So we have to add something to the PCM.
And the something we have to add is there in three.
The assumption we're going to add to it is quite a big one.
It's an assumption that there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.
In other words, neurons don't do everything.
And then part four of the talk, I shall bring those two and three together to a projective wave theory of consciousness and talk a little about firstly how that solves the neural problems.
But secondly, how it fits the data and some more general considerations about it.
So that is the route map of the talk.
So we start off with what are the reasons to believe some theory, whether it's theory of consciousness or anything else.
Why do we believe it?
Basically, we believe a theory because it fits data.
And there's a complexity measure here that needs to fit more data, which you can measure in bits, if you like, than the complexity of the assumptions you put into it.
If you just put in a huge number of assumptions and fit a small amount of data, that's no use.
So there's a kind of Bayesian balance between the assumptions you put into a theory and the data it fits.
And I've illustrated the Bayesian balance pair of scales here.
And I've measured the complexity of the theory and the amount of data it tests by a so-called zip test, which simply says you describe these things in text files, you zip them up and you see how big they are.
So established theories in science, like the theories of physics or chemistry, have a hugely positive Bayesian balance.
They have quite few assumptions and they account for huge amounts of data.
So how can we get to that point of the theory of consciousness?
How can a theory of consciousness produce a positive Bayesian balance between its assumption and the data it accounts for?
So the question arises, what is the data we have to test theories of consciousness?
And there's a big problem, which is well known, that consciousness is a private experience.
And so there's not much public data about it, but there are several kinds of data we can use, such as data about levels of consciousness, alertness and being asleep and so on.
Data about quality and they are problematic because they're private phenomena.
But nevertheless, you can two people can agree something about similarity scales of their quality.
Like different colors being similar or different.
And the form C is the shapes of things in spatial consciousness.
And I shall argue that the main manifestation of consciousness, which we have, what we're experiencing right now, is a 3D spatial model of the world around us.
And that 3D model is very detailed and quite faithful to the real world around us.
And so that has a large information content.
Going down the list, there's conscious imagination.
There is consciousness of the self.
There are anomalies and illusions of consciousness.
And there is the hard problem, if you like, the existence of consciousness itself.
Now, I shall argue that point C, the shape of spatial consciousness, gives us much more data to test any theory than any other type of data.
So what's the testable data in spatial consciousness?
Spatial consciousness is like a 3D model of the real world around you.
That's what you're experiencing right now.
And it has a lot of the geometry of the real world.
And particularly straight lines in consciousness correspond to straight lines in the real world.
And you can test this.
I won't go into the details of how.
So this agreement between our conscious experience, which is quite information rich, and the real world around us, which is obviously information risk, gives a lot of data to test any theory of consciousness.
And I suggest roughly it gives thousands of bits, even in a few seconds.
And I shall suggest that no other form of data about consciousness comes anywhere close to this in terms of testable information content.
So if you really want to prove your theories right, then it's got to account for the spatial form of consciousness if you're going to believe it.
And down at the right here, I put my contention that spatial consciousness is, if you like, the elephant in the room consciousness theory.
So we have to consider how the brain does spatial cognition.
And all animal brains pretty much do that.
They have to understand 3D local space for a very fundamental reason.
Just to control their every movement, to move every movement of their limbs.
They have to understand 3D space around them.
And there's been huge selection pressure to do this well.
And we believe that animals do it very well.
Even insects do it quite well.
And also, it appears that most of the animal brain is devoted to that.
Now, if we assume a Bayesian hypothesis about cognition, then the way animals do that is to build a maximum likelihood 3D model of local space in their brains from their sense data.
So it becomes fairly natural to expect that spatial consciousness is going to be linked to this spatial model.
And the question is, is it a purely neural model, as in classical neural models of the brain?
And if it is, how does neuron firing represent 3D space?
And this is quite a difficult problem.
And really, there are very few viable solutions to it.
But I shall switch now.
I shall put that problem on one side and switch to the projective consciousness model, PCM, which has been developed by David and his collaborators since about 2017.
And it's built on the free energy principle.
So it's based on a Bayesian model of local space in the brain.
And for neural process model, it seems the process model of the free energy principle.
And so the PCM assumes that the brain holds a 3D projective transform model of local Euclidean space.
And the key thing is that PCM then predicts that spatial consciousness is like that model.
And this is a very good prediction.
It agrees very well with data.
For instance, the trivial fact that straight lines in consciousness are straight lines in the real world.
So the PCM has a good Bayesian balance.
I should say this is very distinctive amongst many theories of consciousness.
Very few of them talk about the spatial nature of consciousness.
And if they do, they probably treat it as a bit of an afterthought.
But the PCM puts it out in the front.
And I think that's a very positive feature of it.
And it has a good Bayesian balance.
And it does make various other predictions, which people have talked about in the papers.
Makes predictions about illusions of consciousness.
And makes predictions about predictive imagination and planning actions.
Now, I don't think those are quite as significant in the Bayesian balance, in the agreement with the data,
as the basic agreement with the form of consciousness right now.
Consciousness from sense data.
But I shall say the PCM has three difficulties.
I shall emphasize they're not difficulties of the PCM alone.
I believe they are difficulties of any neural theory of consciousness.
And I'll just list them briefly here because there's going to be a slide describing them.
The first difficulty is neural selection.
How do we pick out just those neurons which cause consciousness from all the others that don't?
And the second one is neural precision and speed.
We know that our conscious model of space is a very detailed and precise one.
Can you do that with neuron firing?
I would suggest you can't.
And the third one is a complex decoding problem that, anyway, I'll come on to that.
So I'll describe these three in a minute.
But the emphasis is that they are not just problems of the PCM.
They are difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness.
For instance, IIT or global neural workspace theory and so on.
So what are the three difficulties?
The neural selection problem.
Most neurons in the brain are not linked to consciousness.
We know that from cortical lesions which don't interrupt consciousness or the cerebellum or Bjorn Mirko has written quite extensively about this.
But neuron theories of consciousness say that the activity of some neurons causes consciousness and not others.
So the question is, how are those special neurons selected?
And as far as I know, there's no sound physical basis to pick out some neurons from all the others.
So you build in some selection assumptions into your hypothesis.
But those form a debit in your Bayesian balance.
So they're a debit for any neural theory of consciousness.
The second difficulty.
Whoops.
All right.
Second difficulty is how do neurons represent space?
Now, there are several possible ways of having neurons representing 3D space.
You can represent 2D space, all right.
Can you return to sharing the screen?
Oh, sorry.
I've lost sharing, have I?
All good.
So how do neurons represent 3D space?
There are several ways they might do it, but they all have problems of precision and speed.
For instance, there is a Bayesian computational model of how animals build 3D internal model of space from their sense data.
And this is already on one of the AII live streams at this YouTube address.
But that model shows that in order to build a 3D model of space, even for a small animal like a bee, you need memory storage errors to be roughly the order of 1%, as small as that.
Whereas if you model neurons accurately, properly, they don't give you this precision.
Because in a neuron, most theoretical models of neurons are ideal abstract neurons whose outputs are real variables of high precision.
And that's shown in the top of this picture here.
Whereas actually neurons outputs are spike trains, which in the short timescale gives very limited precision.
For instance, in a fifth or the second possible timescale for consciousness, you may get about 10 pulses.
And that gives you a precision of only 30% in that timescale.
So the precision you get from neural representations is very different from what you need to build a decent 3D model or what we experience in consciousness.
And this, I think, hasn't been really spotted very much because most of the neural models that you see in the literature, they don't model spike trains.
It's difficult enough to model networks of neurons.
And so they use abstract, precise neurons.
So that's the second difficulty.
How can neurons store a precise and responsive, fast model of 3D space like the one we experience?
Finally, can you see that change?
Third difficulty.
Third difficulty is what I call the hard triangle.
Because conscious experience, which is C in this picture here, is a faithful, hardly distorted model of the real world.
There's the real world, A, and there's consciousness awareness, C.
But what the model we have found in the brain are two-dimensional models and very distorted models.
So there are many different models and they're highly complex encoding to get from A to B.
So if you want to get back from B to C, you have to do very complex decoding to undo all the complex coding that most species brains do.
And so ABC is a hard triangle.
And so ABC is a hard triangle.
You have to have complex decoding assumptions in any neural theory of consciousness.
And the worst thing of that maybe is that the decoding has to be species specific.
It can't be universal decoding.
So those are the three difficulties for any neural theory of consciousness, including the PCM, I believe.
So that's where we've got to.
I've covered topics one and two of this talk.
And now I think we'll break for any discussion or contributions.
Thank you very much, Robert, for your presentation up to now.
I can follow it very well.
I think you point out very important issues.
I should say, and perhaps, you know, we scan that from the standpoint of the PCM, even though indeed we have framed it in the context of active influence and more specifically the free energy principle,
we do not necessarily.
It does not necessarily entails that we buy or we endorse or we believe in the current neural network models that are used in this context.
Personally, I've been a neuroscientist for many years.
I've done a lot of electrophysiology, lesion work with human patients.
Also, I worked with rodents.
I've done a lot of functional imaging and modeling.
And at some point in my career, I thought that I did not understand the brain well enough.
And I stopped doing neuroscience.
I stopped caring, quote unquote, about the brain.
And for us, what is the most important in the PCM at this point is all you said, is that we can capture some aspect of this phenomenology that seems essential, etc., etc.
So personally, I have given up at this point trying to devise or figure out any, you know, realistic neural network models.
And when you take just one neuron, as you said, Robert, it's a universe.
You just think about how receptors are up or down regulated through fast gene expression, how dendritic trees and their complexities and their geometry plays a role in computation.
I don't believe that the spiking of the neurons, which we often call the output of the neuron, are necessarily where we should be looking at.
And I don't know where we should be looking at.
I committed an odd paper a long time ago in 2015, in which I kind of said, well, I explained why I had given up hope at this point about brain science to account for that.
Because I think we don't understand the brain.
I think there are principles we haven't figured out yet by far.
And my guess was that a bit like by analogy with computer science, there are layers of abstraction, mechanism of virtualization that hide the detail of the hardware, which we don't understand at all.
And so, so far, it's a very open-ended thing.
So to me, what matters the most about the PCM at this point is with respect to the brain, it is neutral.
We don't know.
At this point, I have absolutely no hypothesis, except very gross anatomy hypothesis, but are some, you know, possible details about, you know, but you're right.
So, I think that's the problem, but that's the hard problem.
And personally, I have given up on trying to account for it.
Thanks, David.
I find so much to agree with there.
And so, yeah, we don't understand what's going on in the brain.
Maybe neurons are doing something much more complicated than simple spike trains, but maybe there's also this wave.
And we'll talk about that.
Carl, Ken, do you have any comments on this stage?
Carl, you want to go?
Or I can, if you don't mind, I'll just follow up with, I completely agree with what David said.
And I will say my own sort of approach to the problem has always been sort of agnostic about the underlying realization.
So, I've kind of started from, you know, in my own thinking anyway, always from the point of view of phenomenology with some kind of, you might say, general acceptance of some sort of physicalism.
But agnostic about the details of that physicalism.
So, agnostic about whether it's exactly what goes on in the brain or what level and so on.
I guess I've tended to, even though I agree you can't exclude it a priori, I've tended to kind of think, well, quantum mechanical theories are probably barking up the wrong tree.
But that's just like my gut on that.
And then I...
I'm sorry, personally, Ken, at this point, I'm so confused about the brain and about the physical nature of the universe that I'm even totally open that the whole thing is quantum.
I have no idea.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah.
As I said, it's just sort of like my gut on that, but not...
I can't really defend it in detail for a number of reasons owing to my own ignorance.
But...
And I would just add that...
And I agree.
I think the way you presented the PCM generally was exactly right.
You did mention that we do have something to say about imagination, like action planning, and about anomalies and illusions.
And we agree with you, I think, that the main set of data we aim to capture are the spatial component of consciousness and the perspectival spatial component, like what we use projective geometry to capture.
But then we do try to, as you know, try to derive certain other bits of parts of the relevant data from that basis.
So accounting for illusions, like the moon illusion and the Ames room illusion, and accounting for imaginative action planning.
And also, I should add some data about self-awareness.
So we have a paper on self-awareness in this context as well.
So, yeah, I think that's all I got so far.
But this has been very interesting so far.
Great.
Thanks, Ian.
Carl?
Carl, can I make any comments?
No.
I'm just enjoying this as a spectator, batting for both sides.
One comment, and it seems to me that we're focusing on the distinction between principles about how the brain makes sense of its world and the process theories that attend those principles in terms of instantiation.
And there's an agnostic approach I think you can take in relation to process theories.
So I'm interested to see how much Robert's focus will be on the process theory and the actual substrates, which I think is interesting from the point of view of actually simulating this kind of
inference and also being able to reproduce in silico in terms of creating a kind of artificial intelligence that has this kind of competence.
So there may be a more pragmatic focus.
I was intrigued by the previous slide, this hard triangle.
Where are you?
Yeah.
Just go to it.
There.
Yeah.
This, yeah.
I didn't quite resonate with this.
I think for a start, the notions of encoding and decoding for people like me should be usefully unpacked.
um so everything in terms of belief updating is some kind of mapping or morphism or relationship
um so i'm assuming that thing is a good word for it yeah okay so the world generates sensory inputs
and then the brain um represents those inputs i mean for b you just imagine you know the visual
cortex with a highly distorted version of space in it all around the fovea and so on and all the other
cortical maps are highly distorted representations of space somehow you have to cram all those back
into an undistorted representation so you've got to decode the encoding that's gone on
i see so right so the conscious awareness is still part of the brain somewhere
it must come from the brain somehow i think yes then we all i see so you're using encoding and
decoding in a sort of um uh distorting undistorting it's like a distorting mirror you've got undistorted
but i guess it relates to carl distinction between neural neural substrate and process theory because
indeed if you look at the classical sort of quote-unquote 2d maps in the cerebral cortex
uh visual cortex with your retinotopy where you see a lot of deformation but also somatosensory cortes
you think about the classical you know map of the body uh uh and you are saying well if that's the way
it is kind of represented quote-unquote at the level of that substrate then since it is deformed and we
don't experience it that way we should somehow have a process on top of that that use some morphism to
transform this different i'm saying our theory of consciousness has to tell us how that how about
unscrambling distortion happens yeah but i believe that the level of observation that we are considering
here for instance those 2d quote-unquote 2d because they are not really 2d but uh cortical maps uh
retinotopic or somatotopic or you know topic maps uh are very quote-unquote low level of processing
uh which might be very far away from yeah what is going on there might be some other super representation
somewhere but we've not found yet yeah and it might not be visible at the level of the anatomy
well yeah those are alternatives i agree okay so sorry carl i interrupted but i wanted to make
this precision too yeah no that clarifies it thank you but carl i mean i think we can all be agnostic
about certain things in the process model i think you and i at least are not agnostic about basism
them yeah i i would put sort of you know the notion of um sentience of the kind we're talking about
as a process of basing belief updating i i put that at the sort of principle level so at the mechanics
that that doesn't commit to um an infrastructure or a realization or a process that that realizes that
um you know that kind of principle or that kind of uh mechanics um so i think the spatial wave
theory is really a commitment to a process theory um that could you know happily accommodate basing
belief updating and its particular application the context of spatial perception and projective you
know the projective consciousness model
is









































































Good.
Okay, so moving on.
So we've done one and two, and what we're going to do in three is add something to the PCM.
And the thing we're going to add is not a little thing.
It's the assumption, the hypothesis, that neurons don't do everything, but there is a wave in the brain which stores 3D spatial information.
So that's what I'm going to talk about next.
So here's the hypothesis.
There is a wave in the brain that represents 3D space.
So it assumes there is some nearly spherical region of the brain with a diameter D, and it holds waves, which couples the neurons.
And there the sphere is illustrated, and a couple of waves, wavelength lambda 2, that green wave, and wavelength lambda 1, a shorter wavelength, that red wave.
And those waves represent things in space, and they represent the red thing, R1, and the green thing, R2.
So there's a kind of inverse relationship there.
The shorter the wavelength, the longer the distance to the thing that's being represented.
But obviously, if it's a spherical region, you can have waves in any direction.
So you can represent any direction and any distance up to a maximum, which is defined by the minimum wavelength.
So that wave can represent lots of different things.
And the hypothesis is that that wave acts as a working memory for space.
It's really like a hologram.
Now, one issue with that is that if you want to represent objects at very large distances away, then you get into wavelengths that are too short.
So that's why you may need a projective transformer of space to pull in those long distances to be able to represent them on the wave.
By the way, the evidence for this wave is going to be described in another YouTube live stream, which we're making next week.
It's going to be at that address.
So how well does a wave-based spatial memory form?
It can represent approximately D over lambda cubed independent positions, which is quite a lot.
And it can give you spatial precision, the order of lambda over D.
And the point is that this can easily be 1% or better, which is the precision you need.
So there are significant benefits to wave storage.
It has high capacity.
You can put many objects in it.
It has high precision.
It can be fast.
And it has low spatial distortion.
It is just like a hologram.
And it's a very simple and direct representation of space.
So a spoiler looking ahead to part four of the talk is that this is very much like spatial consciousness.
Question, is there any evidence for such a wave?
I think there is evidence.
And there's three kinds of evidence.
First two comes from brain anatomy, because there are spherical regions in the brain which are very well suited to hold this wave.
In the mammals, there is the thalamus.
And that's shown in green on the left of the picture.
And you see it's approximately spherical.
And that is very suitably connected for holding spatial information.
It's connected to all the sense data.
And it's connected to all the bits of cortex that work out what to do with the sense data.
And similarly, in the insect brain, there is a central body in the very center of it.
That is approximately spherical.
And it's very well preserved shape in all insect species.
So those are both pieces of evidence for a wave in the brain.
There is a place for it.
So I believe there are three lines of evidence for a wave.
One is the computational neuroscience, which I've mentioned before, that spatial cognition is a very important thing.
But neural memory for it is too imprecise and too slow, whereas a wave storage model can possibly overcome these problems.
So that's the yellow evidence.
The evidence from the insect central body that is nearly round, very central, very well connected.
And there's evidence from the mammalian thalamus.
It's also round and well connected.
But there's also what I call a smoking gun for a wave in the thalamus.
If you don't assume a wave, the anatomy of the thalamus doesn't make sense.
But I won't go into that in this talk.
So together, I believe these give quite strong support for the wave hypothesis.
In fact, they give it a probability of 0.5 approximately, even if you try and weight the odds against it.
As I say, you can see the discussion of this in another YouTube live stream we're about to make.
So.
Then that's on from part three to part four of talk.
Assume there is a wave in the brain which holds the near projective transform of 3D space.
And this wave is serving a very essential role to understand space, to control all movements for any animal.
And the hypothesis simply is the wave is the origin of consciousness.
That neurons have nothing to do with consciousness at all.
It comes entirely from the wave.
This solves three problems, the three problems that I outlined before.
Firstly, the neural selection problem.
You've no selection problem because neurons have nothing to do with consciousness.
The precision and speed problem.
The wave has sufficient precision and speed to do it.
And the decoding problem.
The coding in the wave is just a Fourier transform.
So it's a very simple coding and encoding.
And it's a very simple decoding to give you back consciousness experience.
So it has solved those three problems of neural theories.
But the main thing is that spatial thought like the PCM, preserving the merit of the PCM, the spatial form of consciousness agrees very well with our conscious experience.
It has to be projected because we need the projected transform to pull in objects from very large distances to represent them by a minimum wavelength.
So in summary, the projected wave theory has a positive Bayesian balance.
Doesn't have any nasties about it.
And it agrees very well with the main source of data about consciousness.
So just some aspects of this theory.
What is the physical nature of the wave?
A big objection might be we've never seen the wave because I believe it's probably not an electromagnetic wave or electromagnetic field.
And the main reason I believe that is that electromagnetic fields on their own don't store information for the time periods we need to store information.
And now electromagnetic fields might be part of the answer, but I think they're not the whole answer.
And the big question then is why have we not detected this wave in the brain?
It's been there all these years.
I think the reason for that is we will expect if there is a wave representing space, we will expect it to evolve, to have very low intensity.
So its energy consumption is very small.
And having that low intensity, we simply haven't known how to look for it.
Now, coming to quantum possibilities, the wave might be a coherent quantum excitation.
And there's increasing evidence that quantum effects do play a role in biology.
And it might even be a boson sun condensate, a BEC.
Now, those examples of those are superconductors and superfluids.
They're a very rare state in nature.
But the key thing about a BEC is a superconductor can hold information for unlimited time.
So it would be good for memory.
And they're a very rare and distinctive state of matter.
And so if you assume that consciousness comes from them, you don't get into a trap of panpsychism.
Or it might not be a quantum effect.
Because I think that this question is entirely open.
So we'll set that on one side.
And that's future exploration.
There's an issue about the evolution of consciousness.
We know that consciousness is our consciousness is like the real world.
It's very like the real world.
And the question is, why is this?
And you think, well, it must have evolved that way because some need for it to be like the real world.
But in neural theories, there's a problem.
Because neural computation in the brain, the classical neural model, is classical dynamics, not quantum physics.
And it's local.
And so consciousness is a non-physical, non-local effect.
And they don't have any effect on neurons firing.
So the result is that consciousness in a neural theory has no causal effect on fitness.
That means there's no selection pressure on it to make it the way it is.
So in a neural theory of consciousness, we're driven to this slightly awkward conclusion that the special form of consciousness that we have is just a bit of an accident.
That seems very unlikely.
Whereas in the projective wave theory, there is a good evolutionary reason for consciousness being like it is.
That is, that 3D spatial cognition is very important.
Wave is an essential part of it.
So the wave has been shaped by evolution.
And it's been shaped to be just like the real world because that's the best way of controlling movement.
So consciousness then is determined by the wave.
And that means consciousness has evolved to be like the world.
So the wave theory solves another problem there.
Finally, the unity of consciousness.
You may ask this question occasionally.
Why do I only have one consciousness and not several parallel consciousnesses?
And this also is something of a difficulty for neural theories because we have plenty of neurons in the brain to have many parallel consciousnesses.
And brains can do some things in massive parallelism.
And if we had multiple parallel consciousness, it might be useful, for instance, for parallel planning of action to see which one works.
That's a difficulty for neural theories.
The wave theory doesn't have this difficulty because it accounts for the unity of consciousness.
There's only one wave in the brain.
That is the source of consciousness.
So there can only be one consciousness.
I think I'm on to the last slide now, pretty much the last slide.
If this theory is taken seriously, it makes consciousness into a scientific problem rather than a philosophical problem.
Because a wave in the brain, if a wave in the brain is the key to understanding consciousness, well, if there's no wave, then this theory is wrong.
Get about it.
If there is a wave, I think there are very strong reasons to link it to consciousness because it has such a good fit to consciousness.
So whether or not the wave exists, that's a scientific question.
It's not a question for philosophy.
And I think there's a good prospect of answering it in the next 10 years.
So in 10 years' time, either this theory will be the only theory of consciousness or it will be wrong and forgotten.
I think that's a virtue in a theory.
So finally, last slide on the hard problem, David Chalmers' hard problem.
The projected wave theory doesn't solve that problem.
What I would say about that is all science has hard problems.
There is the hard problem of consciousness.
Why is consciousness linked to matter?
There are hard problems in physics, like what is space-time or what is the most fundamental particle?
Or the hard problem of cosmology.
Why is there a universe?
So hard problems just don't have an answer.
Scientists, we're like children, keeping asking why.
Say, why this?
Why that?
And we can go on asking why for as long as we like.
So for instance, for fundamental particles, we thought there was matter.
We thought there were atoms.
We got to protons.
We got to quarks.
And we keep going on.
And we'll never get the final answer.
But we still do science.
So I'm not too worried about the hard problem.
Consciousness.
So that is all.
And I've just laid out a few questions we might want to discuss in the remaining time.
Maybe you could share your slide again so we can see the question if you have them on the slide.
Sorry, is it not sharing now?
I see the slide still.
Yeah.
So you can leave it.
Maybe check your view, David.
And then you can leave that up and we can have a panel discussion.
Okay.
Well, thanks a lot.
Those who are here, Ken and Carl and David,
please feel free to comment.
And also people will write some questions in the chat and I'll read one in if you pause.
But anyone here who would like to give a reflection or any comments, that would be awesome.
Could I go ahead?
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
So if I may, I basically agree with what you say about the hard problem.
Just to take the very last thing that you mentioned about the hard problem.
And this is why earlier on when you said that you had kind of a list of sort of, you know,
when you're the idea of the Bayesian balance for theories of consciousness, and you mentioned the existence of consciousness as itself,
something that might be a problem for all neuronal theories of consciousness.
I think you did that in the slide too.
Any theory, yeah.
Yeah.
So I agree.
I think it's a problem for any theory of consciousness, even the kind of more metaphysical theories that people who reflect,
like Chalmers and others, panpsychists, who reflect on the hard problem a certain way, end up with.
You can actually raise the same set of questions for them.
So there's really no progress there, in my opinion.
So in other words, if you take the hard problem as a kind of indication that, well, consciousness couldn't be physical,
or either that or the physical world itself must just be consciousness, which is kind of the two directions they go there.
I think that's kind of misguided.
I mean, we have to sort of accept that our ability to penetrate, you know, cognitively a priori into the nature of the cosmos is limited.
So the best we can do is make models and, you know, based on the phenomenology,
and try to arrive at a model that would give us some kind of neural or physical, to speak more broadly,
physical testable, you know, hypotheses we can test about the physical world and what we think realizes consciousness.
And it seems to me like that's exactly what you're doing, and that's what I would think is right, too.
But I did want to ask you, when you say that no neurons are linked to consciousness in your own model,
do you mean, maybe I just don't understand exactly, but...
They're not linked directly to consciousness.
But they're somehow involved in the realization of the wave.
Oh, they are. Absolutely.
They're controlling the wave.
They're setting up the wave.
They're all on the cortex.
They're using sensitive data to fix the wave, and it's the wave that makes consciousness.
Okay.
And on the issue of unity, well, so suppose we identify this type of wave.
I mean, it's at least, you know, conceivable that we would find multiple such waves.
Would you conclude...
It is conceivable.
Well, I think the evidence in the thalamus and the central body is one wave.
Okay.
And I think one wave is what you need to understand one space around you.
Okay.
So, but if you found multiple such waves...
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
That would be an issue.
Yeah, okay.
I mean, would you conclude that there must be multiple consciousnesses then in a single brain,
or would you think that the theory is wrong?
No, I would have a selection problem.
Just like neuron theories have a selection problem selecting neurons, I'd have a problem selecting which wave was conscious.
I see.
Rather than conclude that there are multiple...
You want to avoid that.
You want to avoid that.
And I...
My experience is I don't have multiple consciences.
Yes.
Right.
My data.
Right.
But that might just be because only one of them gets to report.
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay.
You know, like the way they...
You know, I know it's debatable, but the way they often interpreted the split brain cases coming out of...
Yeah.
Good question.
Good question.
I mean, I say one wave, but we have two thalami.
So the assumption there is that those waves are linked.
And perhaps in split brain, they don't get linked.
Hmm.
Okay.
I think two thalami have one wave in them, but that's a detail.
I see.
And then when it comes to the kind of wave, like...
So you don't think it's an electromagnetic wave.
You think it might be a Bose-Einstein condensate.
That's a hypothesis, I think, that Karen Smith once...
It's been around for some years.
Yeah.
Alexander Karen Smith in the book.
That's the...
Yeah.
Not the book on the origin, the famous book on the origin of life, but he wrote a book on consciousness back in the 90s, I think.
Yeah.
There was Michael Lockwood as well in the 80s, I think.
It's a long history.
Okay.
So how...
When you say that you think we'll be able to probe this within the next 10 years, I mean, could you sort of sketch how that might go?
How we might be able to...
Yeah.
I mean, just...
This is not...
This is probing the idea of the wave.
Right.
As I say, I think that there's three pieces of evidence.
There's neural models that you can't build decent neural models.
There is the thalamus and there is the insect central body.
I think we can go further on each one of those.
We can test them.
We can test the thalamus ideas much better using connectome data.
We can test the central body using connectome data.
And we can test the computational models by just trying to build them and see if we're getting it.
So there is science to be done to falsify this hypothesis.
And it may succeed in falsifying it.
Okay.
But how would you measure such condensate?
I mean, if you want to be able to demonstrate the existence and the property of...
Ideally, you'd like to actually directly detect it.
I think it's a bit like when Pauli in the 1930s predicted the neutrino.
He thought it was absolutely impossible to detect neutrinos.
And it took 25 years to find it.
And I think it will take a long time to really find this wave in the brain.
Because it's very low intensity, probably.
And because we just don't know how to look for it.
And I think we have to do the biophysics.
Until we have a convincing case for,
Ah, it's this kind of wave.
And then we can build a detector.
But until then, I think we won't detect it.
Like neutrino or like dark matter.
Similar thing predicted theoretically years ago, but still not detected.
I'll read a question from the live chat.
Okay.
Andrea Val wrote,
Thanks for sharing such interesting ideas.
I wonder how the PCM or 3D model can explain or deal with the un-consciousness of emotions.
So where is affect and such in this kind of spatialized model?
Yeah.
You want to do it in the PCM first, David?
If it's okay.
Robert, maybe you have read some of our recent work on that.
But I have a specific answer to that question.
Yeah, you go first.
Yeah, sorry about that.
Well, one of the things that we realized working with that particular geometry
is it transforms information in the sense of information in space.
You can think about distribution in space, for instance,
that are going to be changed by projective transformation
in a manner that affects directly entropy.
So if something is very far, you know, and you have some uncertainty about the localization
of these things, so there is a probability function that represents that uncertainty
about the localization of that thing.
And there is only one thing in your field of consciousness to simplify the problem.
Then the entropy of the whole space, if you consider the whole 3D space
and some scalar on it that would represent probabilities, is very small.
Whereas when you get closer, for instance, by imagination,
so projective transformation that anticipates action,
you get the object closer and you transform also the information,
the variance, if you wish, of your distribution, so it becomes broader.
So the entropy increase, actually, as an effect of projective transformation
on the distribution of information.
So how does that relate to emotion?
What we realized is that it can account for some drives that are related to exploration
or exploratory behavior or search behavior to reduce uncertainty or maximize information.
transformation.
And that just does that.
So basically, the projective transformation, by in virtue of making probabilities function
in space change their shape as a function of perspective taking, if you wish,
entail or induce a drive to approach or avoid things or in this context to approach behavior,
either through imagination or through actual behavior, because that will maximize information
by increasing entropy of the object and you have more details.
So that's something that we wrote a paper that is currently under review in biological cybernetics
about that with Grégoire Sergent-Pertuis as first author, who is a bright mathematician.
And we can do a demonstration and actually derive theorems about that.
And also simulations that show interesting behaviors that depend on projective parameters
that will show that the behavior of the agent, depending on the parameter, will be more focused.
So they will tend to always approach one object because they are driven by this anticipation
of increasing information through projective transformation.
But with other parameters or values of the parameters, on the contrary, they start now
oscillating between objects.
They start losing focus as if they were kind of ADHD.
So there is a deep link between, let's say, the evaluation of space, the appraisal of space,
the drives that unfold from this information and the behaviors that you have, for instance, approaching,
and that geometry, that very geometry we are talking about yield, that type of thing.
So here we are talking about what is typically described as epistemic emotion, basically curiosity.
So we have natural curiosity and part of it that drives behaviors is a result of the very geometry
that represents information in the place, according to that theory.
So I cannot enter into the detail on that, but you can also look on papers that we wrote in, what was that, 2022,
in the Journal of Theoretical Biology, in which we use little robots to demonstrate adaptive and maladaptive behaviors
with principles also derived from the geometry and the free energy principle, or something equivalent,
to get a wealth of affective behavior, of approach avoidance, but also social cognition.
You know, you kind of, we can kind of simulate social anxiety.
We can, we obtain joint attention behavior as a result of mutual perspective taking.
And there are a lot of things we could account, that we can use in this model and in this framework
to account for emotion, there is a lot of work ahead, but we believe that there is,
and we have good reason to believe there is a deep link between space and emotion.
That's actually called aesthetics, that consciousness is a form of aesthetics,
where space and emotion are untangled, and that we can fairly well account for many phenomena
that relate to emotion and behavior through this model.
But that's, sorry for the long talk.
That's great.
Should I give my, my sort of answer?
It's very much along the same lines.
Emotion and space are deeply linked.
In the wave model, I mean, the project, the model of space contains all of space,
the external space and the internal space of the body.
And an important part of emotions is feelings in the body,
and they are part of your conscious awareness, part of the wave model or projective model,
just like the others.
And so basically, this, the PW theory, and I think the PCM says,
all consciousness is spatial.
We have qualia, but they exist in space.
You hear words, you experience colors, you experience all of those,
and you experience feelings, all of them in space.
So if you look at all the components of emotion, human emotion, for instance,
the words we say to ourselves and the feelings we have in our bodies,
they are all represented in that conscious space.
So human emotion is a complex story, which perhaps we don't want to go into,
but basically it comes down to the way we experience it is in that model of space.
And if I may, I would have that if you take the standpoint of pure phenomenology
and you ask yourself, when I experience an emotion, for instance, deep anxiety or fear,
something very intense that is very salient,
you can ask yourself how much of that phenomenology of that experience
is actually, quote unquote, reducible to some spatial experience.
Things, for instance, you know, the experience of the body with the heart
that starts pounding in your chest and you feel it stronger,
your lungs that change there, you know, you breathe faster, for instance,
and you can feel that movement in your body and all of that is spatial.
What you feel in your gut or your intestine gets kind of stretched or whatever.
We have metaphors, but actually a lot of the details of the phenomenology
of emotion, of feelings, let's say, I believe is actually spatial,
but it's overlooked.
People don't think about it.
But in particular, when you think about bodily awareness,
there is a lot of spatial stuff going on here.
Yeah, I agree.
Mindfulness and meditation talk a lot about space
and talk a lot about the body.
I think they put emotion in the right place.
Carl or Ken want to add anything,
or I can look for another question in the live chat.
Well, I have one question.
So, I mean, your current hypothesis is that this wave is realized in the thalamus.
Is that right?
That's right, yeah.
Okay, so that's sort of, would, you know,
there's this kind of debate about whether or not consciousness is cortical
or subcortical.
So, this would definitely be on the subcortical.
Yeah, I mean, I think there's a lot of sense in the global workspace theory,
and they were talking originally about a workspace involving the thalamus
and the cortex.
I think it's, the consciousness really comes from the thalamus
integrating all that spatial information.
Yeah.
So, it is down.
So, when, the, the follow-up,
yeah, that's fine with me, frankly.
But, the, the follow-up question is,
well, it's not exactly a follow-up to that.
It's more a general question about your way of thinking about it.
How, I mean, I know you,
maybe you can't really answer this until we have a more specific hypothesis
about exactly what kind of wave it is,
but could you say something generally about how,
the wave integrates with,
or, or what's, what's the right way to put it?
Use, recruits, and, you know,
the kind of computational apparatus of the brain,
so that, you know, you end up,
you decide to,
oh, I'm going to reach out, you know,
yay far and grab this, this bottle.
How does the,
how does, you know, computationally speaking,
how does the wave integrate?
Yeah, I think that's a very good question
and could have a very long answer.
But, basically,
the wave integrates
information from all the sensitive data.
So, from your hands,
from your ears,
from your eyes,
all that information
goes through the cortex,
and cortex decides where it's coming from
and broadcast signals back to the thalamus.
And the thalamus wave
integrates all those signals together
to produce
the Bayesian best model
of what's happening at this moment
based on touch,
proprioception,
hearing,
sound,
hearing,
vision,
and so on.
So, the computation,
it's an integration
of many sorts of information,
possibly in a cycle
between the thalamus and the cortex.
Okay,
but if,
if you need to,
you know,
for example,
program an action,
so you,
that's kind of the,
you've got your sensory,
the integration
of all your sensory information,
now you need to program an action.
How do,
and maybe this is just my ignorance,
how do waves,
how can waves be used
in a way to
generate,
program an action,
and then give it back
to your neurons?
I mean,
I've only got beginnings
of answers to that,
but basically,
a wave is very good
for representing 3D geometry
and for calculating displacements.
I know where my hand is,
I know where my coffee cup is,
so the wave helped me
calculate the displacement,
which way I have to move my hand
to pick up a coffee cup.
So it's that kind of
spatial calculation
that the wave is always
helping us do,
just to move our limbs.
I have a follow-up question
on that,
if I may.
Ken,
do you mind?
Yeah,
no,
go ahead,
go ahead.
You invoked earlier
Fourier transform
and inverse Fourier transform,
so at least 3D Fourier transform
and inverse Fourier transform
in order to do the encoding
and decoding
to, you know,
move from the wave
to the neural substrate
back and forth.
Of course,
as you know,
there is a limit
in resolution
when you do a Fourier transform.
you have the uncertainty principle
that rules
in linear spatial resolution
that we can have.
Of course,
it depends on the number
of samples.
I mean,
there are a lot of arithmetics
behind it that,
you know,
you can be more and more precise
as you have more and more
bits of encoding,
if you wish.
So you say that,
you know,
neural,
classical neural theory
is like build upon substrate
that lack enough precision
in spatial resolution,
for instance,
to account for our experience.
Would you think
that in the context
of a wave theory,
the type of uncertainty principle
that are attached to it
could cause a problem
of resolution too
or that it's the granularity?
There is a problem.
Yeah.
There is a problem
of resolution.
I alluded to it
in the slides.
That is that
if you've got
a minimum wavelength lambda
and a diameter
of the sphere,
d,
the maximum precision
is lambda over d
and that can't
be infinite precision.
So that's
the uncertainty principle.
But the idea
of the Fourier transform
is not that something
in the brain
does a Fourier transform.
It is the fundamental
bridging law
for consciousness
does the Fourier transform.
It says that
consciousness
is a Fourier transform
of the wave,
full stop.
And Fourier transform
is there
in fundamental laws
of nature
like quantum mechanics
for instance.
So it's saying
that this is a fundamental
law of nature
just like quantum mechanics
says momentum
is a Fourier transform
position.
So the bridging law
for consciousness
says the form
of consciousness
is a Fourier transform
of the wave.
I'll make a short comment
or Carl,
do you want to?
After you.
Okay.
Yeah,
just a few.
So thank you
for the presentation
and it's really
interesting on many levels.
First,
you and the paper
goes into more detail
on this.
You lay out
what your priors are
and kind of the
dependency structure
to actually reach
at least an estimate
of probabilities,
which is,
it's really interesting.
It gives a lot of
opportunities for people
to dig in
and say,
yeah,
I think that's 10%
likely or no,
it's a zero.
This is not possible
and kind of close
off a branch of inquiry.
And also this discussion
here about
the algorithmic
and the substrate
realization,
interaction
with the substrate
and even this
polycomputation
idea of the
observer's model
of what's happening
in a process
and kind of like
the dark matter there.
Like the observer
might suggest
that there's
a cryptographic process
though they couldn't
decode it
and then that would
have an entropy
distribution
that wouldn't
be distinguishable
in the absence
of the decryption
from a noise
but it would be
like still a hypothesis
kept alive
and you could say
I think it's a 1% chance
of this being the case.
One thought is
how high precision
really is
the spatial
generative model
in that there could
be visual upscaling?
We know there's
attention play
to make the periphery
look sharp
and have color vision.
Yeah.
And so it's possible
that especially
for like distant
objects,
small objects
that they could be
bundled
and just seen
as an assembly
as a larger object
if they're touching
like the car's
body and the wheel
and then
the same way
that in the periphery
color
and visual attention
seem to give
this extreme
like wow
that's like
exactly this angle
if you were to go
over there
with a protractor
but that could be
as we're sort of
seeing with diffusion
and generative AI models
that could be
quite a low resolution
structural
inference
followed by
a just
compatible
visual
realization
that also
and then
just last comment
really interesting
to explore
how does evolution
and intergenerational
change
shape
the substrate
that the sense
data wash over
so that non-stationary
stable states
whether they're
rate encoding
of neuron
whether glial
electro
and all these other
even potentially
more exotic options
how are those
stabilized?
Wow.
I mean
those are real
questions
to investigate
particularly
the precision
of our conscious
experience
and how much
is
quotes
an illusion
but I personally
think that if you
look at something
which is a straight line
you experience it
as a straight line
with some kind
of precision
that's of the order
of 1%
a deviation
of 1%
from a straight line
would show
and so
that's
a lower bound
on the precision
of your model
but again
there can be
lots of discussion
about this.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Carl?
Any
thoughts?
Well
just
a few
sort of
practical
and specific
questions.
So
the nature
of this wave
if I wanted
to
model it
I mean
are we talking
about a standing
wave?
Are we talking
about a soliton?
Are we talking
about spherical
harmonics
on the surface
of the
thalamus?
Are we talking
about
what kind
of basis
set might
I use
for this
kind of wave
even before
asking questions
about what
the wave
amplitude
actually means?
So what's
the functional
mathematical
form of this
wave?
very good
questions
whether it's
standing wave
or a moving
wave
I don't know
the nice
thing about
a boson
sign
condensate
is that
it acts
like a
long-lived
quantum
mechanical
wave function
in other
words
it has
phase
which can
be detected
and it
preserves
phase for
long times
and the
wave might
have to
preserve
phase
in order
to represent
positions
if you
have a
standing
wave
like
cos
theta
in some
direction
in this
sphere
then there's
an ambiguity
it represents
plus
direction
and the
minus
direction
and what
happens
to the
minus
direction
so
I would
rather
have
phase
in the
wave
like
a
boson
sign
condensate
but
they're
very deep
questions
and I
don't
need
the
answers
I
mean
we
could
start
modeling
and see
what
happens
just
propose
some
answers
basically
you just
need
a
spherical
volume
that
holds
a
wave
excitation
with
a
certain
maximum
wave
vector
and
we
could
try
out
standing
waves
moving
waves
and so
on
what
would
differentiate
a
condensate
from
a
formulation
in
terms
of
a
time
dependent
scrolling
a
wave
equation
well
I
think
your
time
dependence
showing
a
wave
as
everybody
knows
the
problem
with
quantum
in
the
brain
is
that
decoherence
smashes
it
in
10
to
the
minus
20
seconds
but
that
doesn't
happen
to a
Bose
Einstein
condensate
a
long
lived
quantum
state
and
so
that's
an
ordinary
Schrodinger
equation
decoherence
is going to
smash you
in no
time at
all
unless you
have some
incredibly
clever
insulation
like in
a quantum
computer
right
I mean
lifting from
the
microscopic
to the
macroscopic
I mean
that would
suggest that
you need
very very
low temperatures
thermodynamically
speaking
yeah
nobody
has observed
a BC
at room
temperature
yet
but we've
got close
and the
idea is
that nature
might be
cleverer than
we are
one
angle
perhaps from
the quantum
FEP
from
Carl and
Chris Fields
and others
is
and so
what I
heard in
the
in the
basis
set
question
Carl
was
this
brain region
that hosts
the functionality
or a core
aspect of
the functionality
like one
option is
it is like
the wave
is represented
inside of
that sphere
like
just
there's probably
multiple ways
even that
could happen
but it's
like a little
reconstruction
wave
but symbolized
another option
would be
like a
holograph
the
representation
of space
is encoded
on the
interface
of that
region
with other
regions
and so
that kind
of
surface
is maintained
and stabilized
and has
information
flowing through
it
and then
there
wouldn't
necessarily
be
in the
middle
but it'd
be more
like a
ripple
on a
surface
which was
the
basis
set
question
Daniel
that is
very
interesting
because
in the
thalamus
there is
the
thalamic
reticular
nucleus
TRN
which is
a thin
skin
around
the
surface
of
the
thalamus
and
you
could
just
say
that
is
holding
the
surface
wave
and
the
wave
is
projected
inside
from
the
surface
it
would
be
useful
to
engage
Chris
Fields
here
there
are
two
very
distinct
uses
of the
word
holographic
here
you could
be
referring
to the
holographic
principle
whereby
all the
information
on the
bulk
on the
inside
say
of the
thalamus
was
on the
surface
on the
reticular
nucleus
of the
thalamus
for example
or just
on the
surface
in one
sense
and
that is
what the
rest of
the brain
sees
and possibly
consciousness
sees
as
that's
a very
different
use
of the
notion
of
a
holographic
projection
using
constructive
and destructive
interference
to encode
things
so
then you're
absolutely
right
my question
was really
searching
to distinguish
are we
talking about
a wave
function
in the
thalamus
so are we
talking
about
application
of the
holographic
principle
to
the
classical
information
on the
surface
of
some
bulk
that was
the
thalamus
and you
could then
argue
if you
wanted to
that
the bulk
which can
never be
observed
from the
outside
unless you
are the
thalamus
you never
know what's
happening
on the
inside
you could
only observe
what's
on the
surface
that would
be a
different
notion
of a
wave
theory
that would
certainly
be consistent
with quantum
information
theory
and also
consistent
with
Chrisfield's
inner screen
hypothesis
that could
be
spatialized
and endowed
with
a
in virtue
of the
fact
that
on the
holographic
screen
itself
on the
surface
there can
only be
classical
information
and that
information
can now
be
cast in
terms of
classical
Bayesian
inference
but it
also
relates to
Chrisfield's
inner screen
hypothesis
which is
you know
if you like
taking quantum
information
theoretic
principles
and trying
to apply
them to
consciousness
that eludes
the problem
of
applying
quantum
mechanics
that is only
relevant at the
very small
scale
or for very
precise or low
temperature
systems
you could
if you want
to apply
that kind
of maths
to
macroscopic
phenomena
then you have
to apply
it in a
scale
invariant
context
and I think
quantum
information
theory
would certainly
do that
so then
yes I was
exactly
sort of
trying to
probe
are we
is
the
is
PW
red
the
the
Bose
Einstein
condensate
variant
or alternative
version
of
the
projective
wave
is that
committed
to
quantum
mechanics
or is
it
really
an
expression
of
condensate
like
dynamics
in the
context
of
quantum
information
theory
and if
it is
does it
live
on a
holographic
screen
or does
it live
in the
bulk
and if
it lives
in the
bulk
what
are these
wave
functions
over
so these
are the
practical
questions
I was
trying to
get
very
interesting
questions
and it's
all to
play
forward
I
have
an
open
mind
about
them
but
my
feeling
is that
the
BEC
is
a way
of
getting
past
this
decoherence
argument
from
Tegmark
and others
that
neurons
have to
be
classical
and
the BEC
it does
work very
well as
a memory
that's
the
practical
point
of it
working
memory
I think
is what
you need
for
space
awesome
perhaps
each
can give
a last
rounder
thought
like
where
do they
feel
this
takes
them
or
what
are
they
looking
forward
to
and
Ken
then
David
and then
Carl
and then
Robert
I
yeah
I don't
have
anything
new to
add
just
that
I
find
this
really
interesting
and
I
remember
reading
Karen
Smith's
book
kind of
arguing
that
Bose
Einstein
condensates
might be
important
for
understanding
consciousness
and
thinking
that
among
the
quantum
mechanical
hypotheses
I like
that one
the best
so
I
embrace
but
as I
said
earlier
I just
sort of
have
this
kind
of
bias
but
I'm
totally
willing
to be
talked
out
of it
and
yeah
the reason
I mean
I don't
want to
go into
the details
but
I
think
Karen
Smith's
concern
was about
the unity
of
consciousness
primarily
and
also
kind of
made
the case
that
as you
were
suggesting
that
maybe
as you
put it
nature
is
cleverer
than we
are
and there's
some way
to realize
that
Bose
Einstein
condense
it
in the
brain
without
it
you know
the
decoherence
issue
but
anyway
I'm
just
to say
this is
all
very
fascinating
to me
and I
am
happy
to
continue
the
discussion
next
week
right
isn't
it
next
week
yeah
thank
you
Ken
and
for my
part
yes
also
looking
forward
to
continuations
of the
discussion
you know
my
direction
of
questioning
will
be
something
on the
lines
I
think
both
and
David
alluded
to
which
is
the
link
between
spatial
waves
in the
brain
and
the
projective
geometry
that
they
speak
to
and
the
information
geometry
that
underwrites
belief
updating
and
the
basic
mechanics
that
inherit
from
the
free
energy
principle
be it
classical
mechanics
classical
information
processing
or
looking
at
using
quantum
information
theory
to
read
belief
updating
I'm not
sure I'm
going to
get any
answers
but
that's
what I'd
be
interested
in
hearing
more
about
and
the
process
we haven't
talked about
mortal
computation
yet
so we
need
to
talk
about
mortal
computation
oh
yes
any
last
thoughts
well
the
thought
of a
man
who
is
50
now
and
feels
that
the
more
he
learns
the
less
he
knows
this
was
predicted
in
all
the
books
I
had
read
in
my
years
and
so
I'm
all
open
to
that
complex
universe
I
certainly
believe
that
nature
is
clever
than
I
am
for
sure
and
I
find
that
fascinating
I
like
the
rationale
it's
not
like
you
know
there
is
a
lot
of
stuff
about
quantum
mechanics
and
the
brain
and
consciousness
that
to
me
has
always
sounded
wishy-washy
if not
completely
wacko
but
I
came
back
a bit
from
that
I
had
a lot

of
like
can
priors
negative
priors
about
it
I
remember
once
in
Tucson
Arizona
at
the
famous
conference
about
the
science
of
consciousness
there
were
this
bunch
of
guys
who
called
themselves
they
were
German
the
quantum
consciousness
academy
and
they
were
all
dressed
in
black
and
they
are
all
you
know
headset
and
microphone
like
that
and
they
were
like
speaking
nonsense
as
like
a cult
but
I
found
that
very
fascinating
because
conference
back
in
the
day
when
it
was
very
psychedelic
but
that
was
kind
of
you
know
and
I
come
back
to
that
because
my
ignorance
I'm
becoming
aware
more and
more of
my
own
ignorance
I
said
well
why
not
and
definitely
I
think
that
maybe
Carl
can
try
to
do
that
if
we
could
get
Chris
field
in
the
next
goal
he
would
certainly
be
among
us
the
most
competent
I
tried
to
get
Grégoire
Sergent
Pertuis
to
the
call
but
he
was
not
available
he's
a
very
bright
mathematician
and
he
mastered
quantum
mechanics
like
if
it
was
you
know
it's
nothing
for
him
or
Daniel
Benquin
would
be
the
best
also
with
Grégoire
but
I'm
afraid
I
won't
be
able
to
have
them
here
but
I
think
it
would
be
very
useful
to
have
some
people
like
that
who
definitely
know
more
than
me
about
those
things
and
Chris
might
be
interested
to
join
I
don't
know
but
looking
forward
to
the
next
discussion
one
correction
they were
Swiss
David
they
weren't
they
weren't
they
weren't
they
were
Swiss
they
were
Swiss
they
were
men
in
black
I
think
yes
they
kind
of
look
like
people
from
the
matrix
like
they
were
Swiss
they
were
not
German
they
were
Swiss
and
they
had
they
had
a
leader
they
were
always
in
contact
with
wow
okay
yeah
please
Robert
and
and
and
we'll
contact
Chris
that's
been
really
fascinating
I
think
the
virtue
of
this
theory
is
that
it
is
falsifiable
in
other
words
if
there's
no
wave
in
the
brain
forget
it
this
theory
is
wrong
and
that's
exactly
the
question
we're
going
to
be
looking
at
next
week
I
look
forward
to
having
your
contributions
awesome
thank you
all
see you
at
16
UTC
on
July
29th
okay
thank you
thank you
bye
to

















Thank you.

## zqOcywx40n8

hello and welcome everyone this is
active inference guest stream number
82.4 on July 29th
20124 We are continuing this series of
presentations and discussions with
Robert Warden and friends so today we'll
be discussing assessment of the brain
wave hypothesis thank you Rober and
everyone else for joining so please for
the
presentation okay um this talk is about
a hypothesis that we've had previous
live streams about the hypothesis is
that there is a wave in the brain and
this talk is assessing the likelihood of
that being true basically and so if you
want to see the previous talks which one
of which was about the link between the
wave and Consciousness then you can
follow this link here to an active
inference web page so what I'm going to
in this talk is firstly try and describe
to you what the wave hypothesis is and
secondly in point two give some of the
evidence which I think points towards
there being a wave in the brain and some
of the evidence against it uh now the
question then arises we've got different
lines of evidence how do we combine
those lines of evidence to make some
overall estimate of How likely it is
that there is a wave in the brain and so
what I do in point three stage three is
at an overall basian assessment of the
probability that there is this wave and
the answer I come to is about 0.5 is the
probability the detailed number doesn't
matter what matters is that it's not a
tiny probability in other words we can't
just dismiss this wave hypothesis out of
hand we need to think seriously about
what it might mean for the brain If
there is a wave and at that point for um
we will break for discussion and and
feedback from people on the court
and after point 4 we'll go on to discuss
possible future tests of the wave
hypothesis in five and finally after
five further discussion again so that's
the plan of the talk roughly um and the
first part is to describe what the wave
hypothesis is so wave hypothesis says
that there is some region of the brain
which is approximately round in which
there are waves going in all three
Direction c s and there's a round region
shown with a couple of waves and these
waves represent objects in space so the
long wavelength wave Lambda 2 the green
one represents an object at R2 a small
distance and the Red Wave with shorter
wavelength represents an object at
longer distance so that is the
hypothesis that there is this wave
region in the brain and neurons couple
to the wave as transmitters and
receivers so a wave acts as a kind of
working memory for a 3D model of space
and all the models around the animal in
space at the time so that in essence is
the wave hypothesis but the important
thing about it is how well would a wave
based spatial memory
perform and you do some Elementary Mass
the number of waves you can get in this
round region it's approximately if
there's some minimum wave length which I
call Lambda in then the number of waves
you can get in the in the space is D
over Lambda Cub roughly so that's quite
a lot of things you can represent in the
wave and the spatial Precision you can
get is of the order of Lambda Min over D
and that can be quite small so the
benefits of this wave storage are you
can get high precision and that I claim
you can't get out of neurons you can get
high capacity to represent lots of
different objects you get low spatial
distortion
and generally it is a very simple and
direct physical representation of 3D
space it really acts like a hologram so
the question is is there any evidence
that there is such a wave in the brain
and I think there are three kinds of
three main pieces of
evidence the first one comes from the
mum Thalamus and the second one comes
from the central body of the insect
brain now the pamus is shown in the left
in green for three
mammals the point about the thus is it's
approximately round so it's well suited
to hold a wave and it has all the right
connections to hold a representation of
space it has all the sense data coming
in pretty much all the sense data and it
has connections to all the cortical
regions that are making sense of that
sense
data so there are more specific reasons
about the phalus but I'll come to those
later so that's why the thalamus is a
likely can holding the wave and
similarly in insects there's a central
body of the insect brain which is a
small part of the center of the insect's
brain which its shape is remarkably
preserved across all insect species and
it's nearly round so the central body
like the phus is well suited to hold the
wave and it's connected has all the
right neural connections to holder
representation of space so those are the
first two pieces of evidence now the
third line of evidence comes from
building neural computational models and
it's a thing that I think has not been
much remarked
upon um 3D spatial com cognition is very
fundamental it's the first thing an
animal has to do to understand the space
around it in order just to
move now I've tried building 3D models
of space at M David marah's level too
and the point is that to build a model
of space in the brain it has to be
fairly precise a approximately 1% and
you can see this because vision and
other sense data is fairly precise and
there be no point in getting that
precise sense data if you didn't make a
a fairly precise model of space out of
it however it's very difficult to do
that with neurons because in a fifth of
the second which is approximately the
time an animal has to have to construct
his model of space a typical neuron
Spike train has only about 10 spikes in
it and so this can represent a real
number such as a dimension in space with
a Precision of approximately square root
one in square root 10 parts in other
words 1 and three or 30% and that
Precision is very far out from the
Precision which I think you need to
represent 3D space I think why this has
not been recognized or not been spotted
is that we've done neural modeling of
the brain for years and years but
everybody models neurons as highly
precise
reproducible uh units with outputs of
real variables as is shown in the top of
this figure the output of a neural
neuron is usually model as a real
variable with very high Precision so you
can get high spatial Precision out of
that whereas real neurons they have
Spike trains and in a short time a spike
train doesn't represent a number
precisely at all so this I think has not
been spotted
uh and I think it makes a huge gap in
neural models of the
brain and as I've just said the wave
storage can get much better Precision so
wave storage might fill this Gap and
that is the third piece of evidence for
a wave in the brain so in summary three
pieces of three main pieces of evidence
beamus the insect central body and these
neural computational models which
haven't model model 3D space properly
and I think that's a bit of an
embarrassment for the neural model of
the brain really so uh if you have those
pieces of evidence and some evidence
against the wave which I'll come to uh
how do you assess the overall
probability that the wave is there well
it's a binary hypothesis either there is
a wave or there's not a wave and we want
to estimate the probability that there
is one based on several pieces of
evidence and this in analogy is like a
biased coin in other words How likely is
that coin going to turn up heads on the
next time we toss it and you do various
experiments one experiment is toss the
coin M times and you get heads end
times so what you do is several
different experiments you might toss
with your left hand might toss the coin
from an airplane and you might build a
special coin tossing machine and with
each one you do some experiments and so
the best estimate coming out of all
those experiments is the sum of all the
heads over the sum of all the coin
tosses
and so this is the way you the basian
way that you combine the evidence from
different lines of evidence on the same
hypothesis you a lot a weight to each
one which has a certain subjective
element to it and then you sum them all
according to their weights and that's
what I'm going to do to make a basin
combination of the different lines of
evidence about the wave hypothesis and I
just what you do is you
simply you a lot coin tosses to each
line of evidence and you SU the coin
toses
together that I think is uh how people
do science roughly and it is if you like
it's in the textbooks as the basian
philosophy of
science so when we do this assessment
what answer do we get and I've
summarized the answers in this little
table and I've put red rows for things
that are mainly against the wave
hypothesis and green rows for things
that are mainly for it and the two red
rows you'll find are prior
considerations our prior prejudices and
the idea and biophysical mechanisms and
I've given those large negative
weights I've done that deliberately to
show that the overall result is not too
sensitive to those negative weights you
can adjust them a bit and you won't
change the result much and the positive
lines of evidence are the three things I
talked about the thalamus the insect
central body and computational models
and a couple of others there is some
evidence from phenomenal Consciousness
and there are some other
considerations so what I'm going to do
quite briefly is go through those
different rows in the table summarizing
basically what the considerations are I
won't spend too long on them because the
tables are not that interesting but you
can come back to anyone or you can stop
me on anyone ask questions if you like
or come back to anyone in discussion so
so what is the prior considerations that
go against the wave hypothesis first one
I've put in a big weight of 20 for oam's
razor in other words it's an extra
hypothesis we just don't want an extra
hypothesis so let's put a weight against
it and so I've put a big weight of 20
against that it's bigger than I think is
realistic but I've done so purely to
make it clear that the eventual answer
is quite robust against that
and there's a couple of other arguments
I've put in which people might make one
is the classical neural model of the
brain has served as well so why do we
need anything else but I think that's a
weak line of argument because the
classical neural model of the brain
hasn't worked that well that we're ready
to that we've described all the brain
there's still massive number of things
we don't know about the brain so that's
a weak argument and the second argument
is well we never seen a wave so surely
that means they're not one but that that
again as a weak argument I think because
we just don't know how to look for this
wave and it probably has very low
intensitive reasons I'll come to later
so those are weak arguments but
nevertheless I come up with 25 points
against the wave 25 Point against the
wave from prior
considerations so now we move on to
positive in evidence for the wave and
the first one of these is the mamalian
thalamus there is both General evidence
which I've talked about in other words
the phalus has the right shape and it's
in the right connect has the right
connections to all the three 3D model
ens and there's what I call Smoking Gun
gun evidence something that's much more
specific about the thalamus which points
to their being a waven now I'm going to
come to that later in the talk so I
won't go into that detail in detail now
but in summary I think Thalamus offers
quite a lot of positive support 14
against two for the
wave then we come on to the insect
central body there is again the general
evidence that the insect central body
has the right shape and it's highly
conserved across all insect species now
I think that is quite significant in
other words every insect in the world
has the same shape pretty much the same
shape of its central body so the shape
must mean something whereas you compare
that with other parts of the insect
brain like the mushroom bodies for
instance they have very variable
shapes and they just have to make neural
connections but this is a clue that the
central body of the insect brain is
doing something other than making neural
connections and the idea of a wave in it
fits it quite
well um and I think there's other
evidence from the from the insect brain
mainly that the insect brain has very
few neurons in it so there are probably
not any neurons to make a decent
representation of 3D space but we knew
know that insects do it rather well so
that's the central
body next is the computational
modeling as I said 3D spatial cognition
is a vital function of the brain but
that as far as I know Carl can put me
right on this there is no working neural
computational model of it especially
when you ask for a model Which models
Spike trains rather than idealized
theoretical
neurons and in any subsec time intervals
neurons give a big error rate about 30%
whereas we really need 1% or something
to con construct decent spatial
model so the evidence yeah may I ask
just a Precision here the the point here
I think if I follow you well that we
should all bear in mind is the model
that is
needed performance in real time so what
you are saying is the lack of precision
make come also because of some time
pressure that for the to be valid should
be able to build and update this 3D
model of space in quote unquote real
time correct yeah very short time when
you need that model of space to be
really up to date so you only have a in
mammals you have a third of a second and
insects you have even less time and in
that time neurons real neurons are very
imprecise that's the
argument okay so that's the three lines
of evidence for the wave um one line of
evidence I think that goes against is
biophysical mechanisms in other words
how does this wave work and as far as I
know no biophysical model for the wave
has ever been proposed and we make again
the rather pessimistic assumption that
the chances that we'll find one are
small will come to that later but we've
put 10 points against the chances of
finding a decent biophysical model of
the wave now I think that is very
pessimistic especially in view of the
the point that evolution is clever than
we are and so even if we can't think of
it Evolution may be able to think of it
and there in in this table there's some
other biophysics evidence which
approximately balances out so the
biophysics evidence is taken to go
against the wave
broadly uh uh finally the last thing
I'll consider is phenomenal
Consciousness and this was on the last
live stream that if there is a wave in
the brain it leads to a new theory of
how Consciousness works and you can see
that on on that live stream and this
theory is I think is quite nice it
solves a lot of the problems of neural
theories of Consciousness but we don't
want to put too much weight on it
because Consciousness theories are so
controversial but I think what we can do
is that speci
Consciousness the the conscience that we
have right now of the space around us
must come from something happening in
the
brain and our spatial Consciousness is
quite detailed and precise and so that
tells us however it's done that the
model of space in the in the human brain
is quite detailed and
precise and so that again if you come
back to the point neurons can't do it
but way might be able to do it that is
further evidence in favor of the wave
but again because Consciousness is
controversial I haven't given it big
weight at all I've given it four points
so when we and there's some other
evidence that I W don't think I'll go
into so when we combine all the all the
evidence here's the scores we've been
keeping been adding up here's the coin
tosses which came out heads here's the
coin tosses which came out tails and we
have a total of 91 coin tosses of which
47 came out heads so the basically we
were deliberately pessimistic in
stacking up the negative evidence
against the wave but in spite of that
the positive evidence is
one and quite literally the many pieces
of positive evidence add up and so we
get to probability 0.52 or if we take a
simpler view that we just give
every line every piece of evidence one
vote we get 31 votes and 24 of those are
in favor of the way so we get a more
positive number out of that and my main
point is not the number 0.5 or whatever
it is but the the main point is it would
take very strong NE negative evidence to
change this and I don't know of that
evidence and so my main point is really
you can't easily dismiss this wave
hypothesis and if you can't dismiss it
then it raises some big questions
I think if the wave exists we need to
really rethink how the brain works it's
a very different model of the brain we
have um and if not by the way there's
still a huge unsolved problem because
how do these imprecise neurons do 3D
spatial
cognition so
um um what I'm doing the trouble with
the one trouble with the wave hypothesis
is it really rests on the work of one
person at the moment that's just me
that's been interested in it but science
requires reproducibility and debate
between lots of people so what I'm
asking people to do watching this live
stream and asking you to do is please
look at these ideas and assess them for
yourselves uh please provide some
commentary of your own on the wave
whether it's Specialized or generalized
or whatever please challenge the ideas
please get a hold of the spreadsheet you
can download the spreadsheet and and
change the way Waits and see what you
end up with or please bring new evidence
to Bear there may be some evidence
against the wave for it that I don't
know about and please agree or disagree
and what I'd like to do is to collect
that commentary and to make that
commentary available when people want uh
on this website you can get the
spreadsheet and please therefore send
your comments to my
email so that's the call for commentary
and we come on now oh by the way this is
very important Carl friston has endorsed
the call for commentary I hope you're on
the call Carl um based on this short
description of the wave which I'll leave
you to read Carl writes this is the
basian waves in a brain hypothesis and
it challenges conventional views of
belief updating in the basian brain and
it offers a perspective on neuromorphic
computation that's supported not only by
theoretical accounts of functional brain
architectur but receiving empirical
evidence that speaks to a fatic
mechanisms but the important part to me
is it would he says at the end it would
be very useful to see other people's
take on this proposal for Mortal
computation in the brain so please send
in your
comments but on the next slide just
before
discussion
um a few words of explanation of mortal
computation this was introduced by Jeff
Hinton in
2022 mainly in the context of neural net
learning and the paper I'm mainly
referring to is by Alex and Carl in 2023
where they relate mortal computation
particularly to markof blankets but also
to a lot of other things there are so
many ideas in that paper I I can't
possibly summarize them but basically
these are proposal for brain inspired my
biometic Computing I'll summarize I'll a
quote from that paper summarizes what
moral Computing means to Alex car
software is Immortal because it can be
copied to different hardware and still
be executable mortal computation means
that once the hardware medium upon which
a program is implemented fails or dies
the knowledge behavior and functionality
will cease to exist so that's model
computation um my take on it is that
direct physical computation which is the
kind of computation the wave does is
simpler and more efficient than a
universal Computing machine like a
universal touring machine or a universal
Von nman
computer and in particular Immortal
software needs very reproducible
Hardware but that doesn't work out in
the brain for two reasons two big
reasons firstly no two neurons are
identical in the brain I believe and
second secondly even one neuron never
does the same thing
twice so coming on to the relationship
between wave-based cognition and Mortal
computation I think wave based spatial
competition is mortal and it's morphic
to use a word from this paper in other
words it depends on the physical shape
of the thing holding a wave in terms of
their 5es model it is Elemental because
I think spatial cognition is a very
basic thing that any animal needs it's
embodied because embodied in space we're
all embodied in space and it is inactive
because we have to move in space in
order to understand 3D
space so wave computation is tied to a
visible wave and I will claim that we
need to understand 3D space before we
need to learn things and that's why way
spatial cognition is really very
Elemental and an interesting consequence
of this if you believe there's a wave in
the brain and if the the wave is the
source of Consciousness then you get the
conclusion that Consciousness is Mortal
I think we knew that but I think it's
quite
interesting so onto discussion and um
these are some of the points I would
like to hear about in discussion perhaps
you can take them in any order but um
Dan do you want to take
over thank you steering the discussion
yeah how about Alex if you'd like to
give a first comment and then anyone
else can can start to jump
in can you hear me okay let me know if
the background noise is really bad
because I'm in like a cafe so first of
all I think this is very interesting I
did read Robert uh your call for
commentary paper uh before as well I did
have a few notes I mean there's a lot of
things that we could talk about but I I
do really appreciate the connections to
mortal computation thesis uh which is a
corlar of the free energy principle so I
think this is really nice and uh I did I
did like the argument about that waves
are morphic thus you know that they fit
in the framework because we kind of need
that uh otherwise we're just dealing
with Immortal computation so I had
actually some questions I'll just throw
at you that might they might even just
be for further information so one one
comment question is I don't know if
you're aware of Robert West at uh Carl
tin University in Canada uh who has
worked on holographic declarative memory
uh one of your comments earlier about uh
things being holographic and are there
neur models that try to explain or try
to model things that are wavelike but
these aren't really wavelike uh
holographic declarative memory comes
into play where they use complex numbers
and complex number representations which
complex numbers are often used to model
waves um so I was curious if you had
known about that work or if you did uh
why would that be insufficient or how
that might play in the framework and
I'll lump with this another body of
works that way I don't break this up
into too many questions uh resonator
networks or resonating fire neurons have
a wave like construction about them uh
uh what is his name Eugene zovich in
computational neuroscience proposed uh
the zovich neuronal model which is a
very complex spiking neural model and
those Dynamics can be uh constructed
such that they emulate resonate in fire
Dynamics or wav like Dynamics and I was
wondering how that if you were aware of
that if not that might be very relevant
in a potential neural model that could
be a step in the right direction since
you said that we don't really have the
neuronal models or neural computational
models that get at this notion of wave
like comp computation um they might not
be completely relevant so I was kind of
curious about that I'll stop there
because then I have like one or two
other questions so I was curious if you
had any comments on that thank thanks a
lot for that the quick answer is no I'm
not familiar with either of those and I
will go and look at them as soon as I
can uh they may well have insights uh
what I'd say about the wave hypothesis
is it
is the key thing about the wave and I
didn't emphasize this enough is it's got
to be a working memory so it's got to
hold information for a fraction of a
second
and that makes it rather different from
anything that is Neuron oriented but I
will certainly read those to with great
interest thanks a lot yeah I'll try to
uh send Daniel or you some links to some
of those papers to point you into those
directions and then I guess I'll um ask
my other question uh I mean I can also
lump in chrysiasis work on spawn because
there are lots of neuronal models that
try to get at modeling the Dynamics
through spikes and again maybe this goes
into that spikes just don't give us
enough Precision because in the paper I
didn't quite see that but in your talk I
did um which was why why do you claim
that we don't model spikes well as we
have a long history of spiking neuronal
models and computational Neuroscience
and brain inspired computing that do
work very well now again I don't want to
claim that there this is where Carl
could chime in as you mentioned him
earlier uh if there was any that have
been used to model aspects of complex
spatial cognition that I think might be
lacking but like we have hjin Huxley
model again I mentioned the isovic model
uh fiton nagumo there's a lot of these
complex Dynamics uh that can actually be
used to engage in very complex machine
intelligence tasks uh that for example
you can train simple robotic Control
Systems uh with like modulated forms of
Spike timing dependent plasticity which
is also a very rich and long history in
Neuroscience for plasticity of course
and this is where we're now we encoding
in synapses I'm not sure that this feels
at odds uh with the wave hypothesis but
rather could be tools uh that you could
be used to build wav like models and
again I was just curious to know if
there's still something about those
particular spiking neuronal dynamics of
which we have decades and Decades of
work that are just lacking to give you
what you seek um and again is it just
because we can't really represent things
with 10 spikes in five milliseconds that
even if we represent them Faithfully to
the neurophysiological data uh that's
still insufficient for representing what
you want and you're just saying we need
another mechanism that's the part where
I was a little confused yeah I I think I
please send the references I love to see
those papers I think specifically what
I'm saying is in I haven't seen a
detailed 3D model of space to the level
of resolution like a B's eyes or our
eyes that's actually built with neurons
firing there may be lots of uh neural
models built with Spike trains I'm not
aware of like I'm not aware of any
models within the Fe active inference
work I'm not aware any models outside
like Edmund rolls biset or um Jeff
Hawkins stuff and so on I believe that
all of those use precise theoretical
abstract
neurons okay that's fair um I think
uh yeah I think I I think I get what
you're trying to say I do I do feel like
there might be some interesting work out
there like for example I'm sure you've
heard of the recent model computational
models in the OS for like grid cells
which is used as an important part of oh
yeah no I think looking at grid cells is
an important thing we have to
do okay that might be complementary
rather than an opposition as I I do like
the way hypothesis I don't necessarily
think that this is data that would
necessarily refute it and this is where
Carl might chime in uh because again if
he's aware of any good neuronal models
or computational neuron models that
actually get at this that I'm not sure
that great
thanks Carl or Kenard jid feel
free perhaps I'll take the lead and just
um respond to those those comments I
think um you could argue both ways um
but it does rest very
sensitively on whether the wave is a
description of neuronal Dynamics under
the neuron
Doctrine or whether the wave hypothesis
commits to some divorce between the wave
however instantiated and the uh neuronal
activity so certainly
um the
the if you
say that the wave um is an appropriate
description of Ensemble
Dynamics um on the cortex or in the
hippocampus or in the
thalamus um then one could easily argue
that um it will be difficult to disprove
the wave of hypothesis and indeed there
are people's uh whose entire career is
built about uh built upon understanding
um spatial cognition and Beyond in terms
of cortical field theory for example so
we just look at the uh oh there are many
examples here
but the sort of U classical example that
comes to mind is the work of Peter
Robinson Australia um and developing
quite sophisticated wave likee models of
um neuronal Dynamics idealized can I
come in there car ju just briefly I mean
the key thing about this wave hypothesis
it's got be working memory so it's got
to store information for um and and it
is a separate non-neural wave that's
basically the way it's
pitched and it has to be a wave which
can store information for a fifth of a
second or a third of a second or
something like that and so it's not just
electric Fields passively caused by
neurons yes so that speaks to you know
what what does the the wave hypothesis
um commit to uh and you're giving a very
clear answer that uh it is not merely
articulating um Ensemble dynamics that
will could transcend neurons we could be
talking about G cells we could be
talking about Quantum coherence you know
but the the key thing is that you're
summarizing spatial extended Collective
dynamics of active matter in the brain
um yeah in terms of uh INF frequency
space basically so you could you could
say what this is exactly the same move
that quantum physics makes it's instead
of yes absolutely yeah um you basic I
mean at its simplest you can regard
quantum physics as basically
articulating Dynamics um be specific
about this sorry articulating density
probability density Dynamics in
frequency Space by appeal to complex
numbers and for transforms
um and um what's what's the benefit of
doing that well you can use foro
transforms and all the orthogonalization
and all the linearization of various
problems that ensues um what's the
difficulty well the slight problem with
um modeling probability waves is that
once you take a forer transform there is
no natural way to uh impose a su tow
constraint that you would need in order
to interpret as a Poss a probability so
what do you do you have to invoke a born
Rule and then think about probability
amplitudes but the message here is that
there is a great utility in taking any
arbitrary
Dynamics in some Metric space and
specifically density Dynamics and
projecting them into the space of waves
um and from that point of view you know
one could argue that this the wave
hypothesis is not a hypothesis it's
actually a principle or a proposal for a
better way of understanding Collective
Dynamics and in that sense I think there
are lots of examples of that and I come
back to cortical field theories Quantum
field theories of um um applied to um
sort of the brain um that have the right
kind of damic will have exactly the
right kind of um um working memory so
I'll just give you a couple of examples
there is work um looking at um Chimera
States in cortical field Theory um where
um one can find things like solons which
are you know brings us back to last
year's conversation condensates and the
like more interestingly more recently um
there's been empirical evidence from
both EEG and
fmri of vortices on the cortex um which
are if you you know one way of
understanding um classical like Dynamics
um in the space of waves that have the
kind of
itinerancy and
um solenoidal aspects that do remember
things by returning to the same state um
so if you know I think there's lots of
empirical evidence U that and thereby um
meaning that they have memory in the
sense of say a konari map um and these
are explicitly articulated in terms of
traveling waves that have this circular
noal aspect that can be empirically
detected however so I you I think your
answer the question is there any
empirical evidence for a formulation of
um brain Dynamics Beyond um a commitment
to particular the neuron Doctrine um
that can be articulated in the space of
waves that fulfills the the uh
requirements of precision for memory and
representation I would say yes but that
does not answer the question
is are these waves mere descriptions or
of one or many kinds of descriptions of
some
underlying um some underlying
Dynamics um or does the spatial wave uh
the wave hypothesis of the brain say
that the actual substrate the Mortal
substrate cannot be just limited to uh
message passing among uh among neurons
and that's what I meant by the neuron
doctrine that I think is
yeah yeah that I think that is my view
it cannot be reduced to neurons
basically yeah that's what I understood
from your previous talk in the slide you
shared before of course there is there
are a lot of waves in the brain for
instance related to electromagnetic
induction and there are a lot of old and
very powerful models go back to nun
years you know to connect with SCS
discussion of EG Dynamics but I think
one of your points is that the wave
whatever that is uh cannot be just an
epip phenomenon and it has to have an
inductive power on neuronal Dynamics in
return um there is some model I think
that are emerging uh or some theories
that are emerging about electromagnetic
induction uh uh like electromagnetic
wave in the brain that with inductive
power on current in the in thees um I
haven't followed that literature for a
while as I told you before I give up
gave up on Neuroscience uh but um so
what you require is really something
that has a you know bottom up and top
down quote unquote sort of mechanism to
begin with this wave has to be sustained
and it has to be in in of itself a form
of computation that can then feed back
to the noral network that's
question yeah
Ken would you like to give any
comments uh just to maybe a one for
everybody a question for everybody might
it reveal some of my ignorance here but
um is are there any sort of General
results about the capacities of waves
for computation relative to other types
of computation it's it's a kind of
analog in computation isn't it it is
analog is very appropriate term for it
but I I would say the the role of the
wave is more information storage than
computation but it it actually may be
involved in both but the key thing is
it's got to neurons May compute 3D space
there got to be some way of storing it
with adequate precision and that's what
the wave is supposed to
do but I should add if I may that
Computing 3D space in particular in an
active in C kind of a realistic
biological uh context for you know
animals that's not just representing
space it's also acting upon it through
Transformations that are not just about
change of coordinate for instance under
hypothesis there is the projective uh
group that is acting on a projective
space but then you have the space that
is itself filled with features that
themsel as their own operators like
different groups for and spaces colors
and how all these things like perhaps
through models of fiber
bundle interact is very key so the the
computation of um space as you think of
it and I think is perfectly correct and
and talks to me uh is much more than
just uh you know represented
representing three coordinate at one
point in time I agree I
agree just to speak to um Ken's question
about are there any laws that would be
applicable under the wave
hypothesis just going back to the
analogy with quantum mechanics if one
thinks of the wave as a
probabilistic um representation or
memory um then you'd certainly be
looking to Heisenberg and certainty
principle and the de brogly
relationships so I perhaps this could be
a question for Robert you know H how
would you unpack the spatial Precision
in relation to the temporal Precision
because you talk about memory but the
the uncertainty principle would mean
that you can um you can have a certain
um spatial Precision at the expense of a
temporal precision and vice versa indeed
that is one if you like gift of a wave
hypotheses certainly as read from the
point of view of Elementary uh qu Quant
quantum theory um the the other so
question i' reflect to you in terms of
the deoy relationship what what what
what is the analogy of say energy and
mass in in these in these ways you know
how would you in how would you interpret
this to a sort of 101 physics student um
when it comes to with great difficulty
um I let me first speak to the spatial
Precision I think the uncertainty
principle is basically a property of the
fer transform a wave that's confined in
a certain distance has a certain
uncertainty in its wavelength and
wavelength is momentum in quantum
mechanics and and position is position
so that's the UN that's the the origin
of Heisenberg uncertainty principle is
simply the Freer transform of a bounded
wave that speaks to the spatial
Precision but as to the actual
biophysics of the wave and there is some
relationship between wave vector and
frequency I don't know what that
relationship is but the the gr as you
recall
uh which way does it go frequency over
wavelength is Phase velocity and the
derivative of
wavelength with respect to frequency is
the group velocity now all those
questions about what the group velocity
is what the rest mass of these if there
are Quasi particles what's their rest
Mass I don't know but uh for instance
one of the more far out hypotheses I
consider is as we discussed it last time
was that the W is actually held in a
Bose Einstein condensate and in a Bose
Einstein condensate there are particles
called roons that haven't phonons
normally have zero rest Mass but there
are particles uh called Rons and others
which have nonzero rest M and that may
be something to do with their
persistence in time but nonzero rest
Mass gets you into the whole question of
what's the frequencies of this wave what
are the wave vectors
and as far as I'm concerned it's all the
Wild West it's all to play for really I
I I'm only making suggestions at the
moment thanks I'll make a few short
comments so thank you all for the
discussion and Robert also for making
the basian epistemology very clear I
think it's really cool also that was
very insightful discussion on one
possibility the wave is epip phenomenal
like David said plays more of like a
memory possibly even a memory with no
causal
efficacy no I'm sorry I did not mean
that I mean according to what I
understand and is necessary
for Rob model the wave must not be a p
phenomenal yeah and that's right what we
know about EG except some models for
instance now there's some models of
electromagnetic propagation with notion
of feedback induction that should be
looked into but overall the way we model
EG for instance from the neuronal
current is EP phenomenal it's just you
know summation at the level of an
electrode and so the wave itself is an
epiphenomenon and the the model of
Robert does not want that I totally that
agree and that that's where I was going
was sorry to attribute it to you that
way but it was yes to to a more active
computational role kind of like this
Reservoir
Computing area um also a general Point
kind of summed up by figure 4.3 in the
2022 textbook is there's like continuous
and there's discret models in space and
in time
so given the continuity of space and
time just at a first pass a continuous
representation or model like a wave may
have certain advantages over holding it
in a discret way and then um in the act
of inference does not contradict folks
ology work there's the continuous time
model on the lower scale and then a
discrete more switching slower model
that could be like an intentional
context oh so so there is precedent in
terms of having a lower level continuous
model higher level discreet models and
uh then more to taking that to the
bigger
questions there's also some natural
empirical correlations with bigger
slower things and faster smaller things
so to the discussion of well multiple
things are represented like space and
time some of that is doesn't need to be
an open-ended representation it can be
like evolutionarily tuned or
developmentally tuned or learned um and
then last comment just on the insects it
was a great point a a line of evidence
that's very promising because there's a
lot of neurophysiology and neuroanatomy
available in insects and just to say
that the
visual region of the the brain this is
arthropods and insects and the old
factory as well as the mushroom body
have more like stereotypical units and
they do have more change in size and
more variation in evolutionary whereas
some of the interesting evidence from
what you presented from the insect brain
is that the actual geometric volume and
size of the central body is relatively
conserved even as other parts of the
brain have a lot of allometry so that
suggests that one way or another either
it doesn't need to be explained in terms
of fulfilling a adaptive function it
could just be oh it's contrain or
something like this but if it is going
to be playing a a role which is a fair
assumption in an energy limited system
then part of its role can't necessarily
be improved by making it bigger or
smaller yeah I agree I
agree you mean relatively bigger or
smaller right because I mean it the
central body does scale a little bit
with with the insect brain size but it
it scales less rapidly than the total
insect brain
size the interesting to hypothesis see
whether it scales with the visual Acuity
of the
insect yeah how the different regions
size and other attributes this could be
in mammal Andor arthropods power the
empirical psychophysics and the just
noticeable
differences described or explained by
like for example just geometric volume
of the old factory L whereas if the or
is there some other variance to be
explained
yeah well but there will be a lot of
correlations between you know neuronal
population densities and and volume so
if volume increase you may have more
neurons
uh obviously you know that's basic
neuros psychology 101 and vision
Neuroscience one1 you know if you lose
the neurons you acity diminishes so
there seems to be a strong correlation
between your angular Precision or acity
for many other things and the number of
of neurons and connections that those
neuron makes but after a while if you
lose twoo many neurons you have a de
differentiations like think about neurod
degenerative diseases like you know take
alimer for instance where everything get
disconnected and there is not enough
neurons to represent stuff so that I it
would be hard in the C you know given
what is fairly know in Neuroscience to
reject the importance of the I'm
simplifying here the number of neurons
the number of neuronal units in your
brain and your uh resolutions capacities
thank you yeah how about Robert continue
with uh part two should I I bash on yeah
great well thanks everybody for
that uh so here's what we've got to on
the road map we've described the
hypothesis evidence for thre against
we've done the assessment and we're now
on to Future tests how can how can we
test this way hypothesis and I'll divide
this roughly into what can we tell from
aonomus from the insect central body
from computational models from
biophysics and from other sources of
evidence so I'll just go through some of
those um so um this probability 0.5 is
an unsatisfactory place to be we really
want to drive the probability up or down
and so the first thing to do is to
stress test the three main groups of
evidence that we have already and then
we look at other evidence for and
against and there are a lot of possible
tests described in this paper which I've
given the link to the P tests are all um
in this table here now I'm not going to
go through all the table uh I'll just
say the paper allows you to sample the
particular area that may interest you so
you can just pick out the section that
speaks to whatever test you're most
interested in and I'll just do some
dipping in sampling
myself so the first first thing is the
so-called What I Call The Smoking Gun
the specific evidence in the thalamus
and what this specific ele evidence is
is there's a picture of Thalamus here on
the right and so Thalamus is a round
thing at the center of the cortex which
is like a hemisphere around it and what
you have to notice is the thalamus in
mammals has lots of different nuclei
thalamic
nuclei and the thalamic nuclei are only
very weakly connected to each other
but they are strongly connected both
ways to the cortex so the question is
why don't the thalamic nuclei move out
of the thalamus towards the cortex
they're going away from each other there
only weak connection with other nuclei
they're getting closer to the cortex so
they're reducing the length of mated
axons and that would save a lot of
energy so that's the problem with athus
under the nuclear model if the nuclei
exists just to have neural connections
to each other they're very weak neural
connections and energy could be saved by
moving out each nucleus towards the
cortex whereas if the thus has a wave in
it there's a good reason for all the
nuclei clustering together the nuclei
have to be together in the same
wave now I've tested this energy
argument by
actually uh modeling what happens when
you move theic nuclear
and approximately I obviously it was
very approximate test on the human
Thalamus and the answer was yes you can
save energy that way so there is a
mystery of why the phalus stays together
but that was an approximate test I think
now that test could be done much more
precisely using connectone data brain
connectone data so you could use brain
connectone data you could have a
computer program that tries out various
moves of nuclei to see if they save
energy so that that is the test that you
could make this argument about the
Smoking Gun much more
precise and there's a similar test for
the thalamic particular nucleus which I
won't go into I would
say sorry sorry to interrupt I would
have kind of is it possible to interact
Slide by slide or do you prefer that we
yeah absolutely
yeah so I I get your uh energy argument
in term of neuro development or neuro
evolution of anatomy and you know
anatomical relationships though I would
argue I mean I would not argue I would
you know ask you but you know what if in
this uh energy model you take into
consideration all the inputs and the
outputs uh from Sensory neurons for
instance from sensory organs the eyes
for through the optic nerve uh and of
course then the output toward the cortex
but also the you know motor input uh I'm
not sure uh that if you think about all
this wiring then your energy model not
forgetting all the white matter that you
have you know and connectivity that you
have between the cortex and the thalamus
not sure that the energy model would
fair that well that's the course um well
the basic point is that when I did the
approximate calculations I did
take account of the
upcoming you know the sensory neurons
coming into Thalamus the point is if the
phalam was is just a relay pushing data
on from sens dat to Cortex then moving
the thalamic nuclei would be neutral
whereas because there's feedback
camic connections you actually gain an
energy by moving out towards cortex so
this calculation has been done albe it
very proximately and I think the
opportunity is to do it much more
precisely taking account of all thalamic
connections from connectome
data uh but you you know of course and
that's really a bit uh old for me I
haven't been into this literature for a
long time but there are B models
connectivity it's yeah thalamic nuclei
kind of lives in CEO but they actually
have Silo I don't know you know there
mod but they actually have bodal or
triod uh uh interactions that are kind
of fine some of them are modulated by
the reticular nucleus is that with each
other I understood from maray Sherman
there's a quote from him that says there
are no connections he puts it very
strongly when was that published remind
me um well I mean he publishes book
about Thalamus in 2006 but yeah since
then he's written a lot of papers about
Thalamus and and he's
well yeah sometime people are very
assertive but you have a great all that
neuroanatomist that I've met in the past
like G vanen uh uh they look at the
brain in very very very very small in
minute details you know they they do
real microscopic Anatomy and the way
they see the brain universe is quite
different from uh I don't know if this
nor anatomist you are talking
about work with these methods uh I would
be
very prudent with connectomic
data I think they are useless but anyway
that's another so you suspicious of
connect home data yeah hold the DWI I
mean DTI data and function okay that's
my personal opinion but I'm radical I'm
almost you know I think they are useless
lot I think they are useless but anyway
we can have another discussion about
that
yeah anyway to me there's quite a close
analogy between this argument about the
thalamus staying together and the
argument from Galaxies for dark matter
in other words when people looked at
galaxies a long time ago they found
there wasn't enough mass in stars to
hold the Galaxy together by its gravity
so they invented Dark Matter so I think
when we look at Thalamus there's not
enough neural Connections in the
thalamus to hold it together against the
pull outwards towards the cortex and and
so the wave is a bit like dark matter in
the thalamus
so that's the analogy anyway but I think
the connectome test should be a precise
way of uh stress testing this
hypothesis right the in central body um
as I said the gross anatomy suggests a
wave but you can't make the same Smoking
Gun argument but I think there's a lot
of detailed Anatomy that you look at of
detailed neural connectivity where the
synapses are distributed and where what
happens in the compound synapses I think
they're very
suggestive and there may be not a simple
connectone test using nuclei because I
don't think there are nuclei in the in
central body but there may be some
connectone test
that can reveal whether the Neuron model
actually is sufficient to account for
the shape of the central body so this I
think is a very open area for
investigation I personally like it
because I think science should be done
on simple things and there's this quote
from Ramon kahal that said the melan
brain is like a grandfather clot the
insect brain is like a Swiss watch I
like that so I think we should look at
them so the Third
argument we should stress test is neural
computational
models uh I make this claim that
understanding 3D space is very Elemental
it comes before learning I think because
animals have to do that before they can
start
learning and I've built a model of 3D
spatial cognition at level two and that
needs High precision and had this
argument before new or Spike
trains only give much less Precision in
short time so what we need to do I think
is to stress test this argument by
really trying to build a model of a
neural model of spatial computation
using mortal fible neural neurons and
one good framework to do this is is the
free energy principle because it's got
well established neural process model
and if we can make this work with
neurons then maybe a wave is not
necessary but if we can't make it work
with neurons then that that strengthens
the case for the wave just another slide
on this I think we should try and build
two models say in the F
Fe um perhaps using the level two model
as a starting
point but in the moral neural
model we have to model do we model Spike
trains or do we model just a variable
neural Precision there must be some
neural in prision we model if we model
neural in Precision how do we do
gradient descent because you'll see I've
struck out here if you do naive
calculation of gradients in other words
you compute a quantity and then you
shift some input variable small amount
and you compute the quantity again to
compute the
derivative if there are lots of Errors
you don't that doesn't work because the
imprecision overwhelms the
gradient so there's an issue there about
how you do gradient calculation I'm not
sure
how you tackle that obviously you can
compute gradients explicitly but it's a
more complex computation than Computing
a
quantity next question how do you do a
gradient descent in
space and I think in the FP a gradient
of a free energy is a three vector and
Precision in the F sense is a tensor
probably how do you what coordinate
system do you use do you use cartisian
coordinates I don't know I mean seems to
me cartisian coordinates in the brain is
a bit
unrealistic so the key question I think
is I expect that the naive Precision of
neurons from Spike trains is not going
to do the job so the question is can we
have some clever neural Micro Design
which gives us High precision and high
speed and the final question is do we
use a spatial hierarchy as is common in
the F or do we use a Blackboard
uh again I would prefer using both but
the issue of what are the mark of
blankets arises there so that's the
issues we' have in a pure neural
model in a wave neural model how do we
model a wave do we build a physical wave
now that suggestion is not quite so
stupid um one could build it um in the
very early days of computing there was a
thing called a Mercury delay line memory
which actually used a way for storage in
one dimension and we could build
something like in three dimensions but I
think that would be very expensive not
as expensive as building a quantum
computer but very expensive anyway so do
we simulate a physical wave or do we
just simulate the memory parameters that
we get so simulate the Precision and the
capacity and so on I would prefer to
start with a simple simulating of the
memory parameters and in other words I'd
like to move down from level two to
level three in successive
stages so that's um the Active Vision in
Exploration another area we can look at
is if there is a wave in the brain it
should show up in genomics and
proteomics
somewhere and there should be some genes
which express only in certain places
like in the thalamus or in the insect
central
body or those genes May the proteins may
be particularly affected by anesthetics
because
on the hypothesis that anesthesia
disables spatial cognition disables a
wave you might expect a a link between
those proteins and anesthetic
molecules and we're looking for proteins
which not only sustain the wave but also
proteins involved in neural transmitters
and receivers which exchange information
with
neurons and I
think that's a promising line of
Investigation if we find any possible
proteins they could help to constrain
the biophysics which I think comes
next biophysics of the brain is
absolutely wide open I have no idea
really there are some very preliminary
Clues and I think most of the ideas are
probably wrong but the key thing is the
wave needs to store information it must
persist for fractions of a second so
it's probably not purely
electromagnetic uh because as David said
that's an EP epiphenomenon activity so
could it be a coherent Quantum
effect uh the problem about quantum
mechanics of course is
decoherence removes it very quickly and
you have to somehow conquer
decoherence there are ways to combat
decoherence I'm particularly inclined to
interested in looking at nuclear spins
there's a chap called Fisher who's
looked at spins of the phosphorus
molecule which he claims can have
coherence times as long as seconds or
even minutes
um there is
this possibly attractive idea that the
wave could be in a Bose Einstein
condensate or a Fric
condensate um so there all these
questions all these possibilities I
haven't really any strong direction or
other but we have to answer the question
a how does the wave persist and B how do
neurons couple to it and we might get a
clue in that respect from single celled
animals we'll come to that in the next
slide
but I'm saying this is a tremendously
difficult problem and just because we
can't think of an answer we shouldn't
underestimate
Evolution and I think broadly we need to
find some possible me before we can
start looking for it
experimentally
um this is intriguing to me um there are
single- celled animals like eroid is I
can't pronounce it it's a single cell
animal it's kind of vanav and it has
complex Behavior it hunts and eats
crustation eggs and it has something in
it which looks suspiciously like a lens
of an eye and something which might well
be a retina so does it have a lens and a
retina if so how does it use that
information if it hasn't got any neurons
how does it guide its own
behavior can there be a brain without
any neurons and could that be a
precursor for all the brains could it
arrive evolv in prean Era and and
persisted through the caman era so I
think there is something to be learned
by looking at these single cell
animals may I comment again yeah sure I
totally agree with you if you look at
paramia obviously they are very
sophisticated sensory motor schemes they
have some there's some evidence that
they can have some memory they have can
be conditioned they have potentiation
some of them like spir spirostomum if I
remember well and obviously the
computation quote unquote or the analog
analog computation if you prefer is
going through molecular networks but
works exactly as well as a as a
collection of
neural animals uh so that's also is
telling that computation again quote
unquote memory and active inference uh
can go through many type of biological
networks uh and so we shouldn't think
that because the neurons are the most
appearent and they are very very
sophisticated and complex that uh there
are no other kind of unknown for us
mechanism of computations that go
through biological network of protein
network if you wish that I think it's a
very interesting hypothesis and that the
multiscale interaction between all those
things is also kind of an entire
universe that we you know barely
understand mro
gal cells are now we understand better
that they have not just a trophic hole
but a very sophisticated computational
role so anyway uh I think that's that's
a very important thing to consider in
know for the future of
Neuroscience great thanks David yeah so
I've really finished my talk um over to
discussion again um so some of the
topics we might touch on with the
connecto ISS
or particularly the computational model
very interested to hear Carl and Alex on
that and insect brain studies and even
the biophysics so um over to you
please
naughty um is preparing his um revealing
answers and commentary I'll talk rubbish
for a moment um so I I just pick up on
the sort of practical issue of the
connect term I think I I think um David
was showing an understandable allergic
um response to connector based upon
diffusion weighted Imaging using
non-invasive magnetic resonance imaging
um I think what you're talking about is
this connectivity that could be tracing
studies it could be um supplemented with
problemistic trap toogy but you know so
if you just don't use the word connector
I think I think um uh you'll be fine
just talk about connectivity studies um
which are usually definitively um based
upon sort of you know staining and
tracing um at a microscopic uh level as
opposed to right
reconstructions um for me um well you
know the tests of the hypothesis
um there for me the ones that you've
offered um they do um invite rather um
if like deflation responses so for
example the arguments that a single
neuron firing um over a 256 millisecond
um period cannot um contain the
sufficient statistics required re ired
for spatial temporal Precision of the of
the sort required for um spatial
navigation at a certain space-time
scale you know one simple way of
counting that well that's true but if
you give me 10 to the three of these
spiking neurons and I can now just write
down um the um Ensemble average then
they do um so the whole Precision
argument can be I think almost dissolved
without making any iral moves or any
tests can I come in on that I I think if
the test You' you've had your chance
fromer no no no this is
no just briefly just briefly the test of
the Precision argument is to build a
model that works and by the way do it
for an
insect yeah um so I think we're getting
pretty close to that but and in so doing
um you actually appeal explicitly to
mean field approximation which is
exactly modeling
the probability distribution of
populations or ensembles in the S
mechanics sense so you know you know the
I I'm reminded now of um Rodney
Douglas's ambition for the EU to build a
b uh I think if you look at certain um
drone rumber applications of Slam
simultaneous localization and mapping in
Industry actually out there um you will
find that the you know not perhaps to
the level of a bumblebee but certainly
to sufficient to um clean up the airport
floor amidst moving uh passengers that
kind of technology is already there um
and you know I would imagine in about 3
years you will have um the same kind of
Technology um operating at the level of
drones and and at that point I think you
can say yeah we can do this without
without a wave hypothesis um yeah but
drones with respect have perfect
theoretical accurate neurons they don't
have mortal
neurons that's yeah the point being that
you can simulate a population of mortal
neurons such that the random uncertainty
averages to zero so this is what is
meant by mean field approximation so
that all of stochastic and Cal
thermodynamics rests upon this so the
density Dynamics itself now becomes
deterministic you are still modeling
something which can be quite noisy with
lots of random fluctuations and
thermodynamics underneath them but the
density dynamics of the kind that
quantum physics would appeal to is
actually deterministic but I'm not I'm
not you know reason I sort of was
teasing you said you can't respond
because it's our turn now was I don't
think I don't think these are important
arguments to me the important argument
is something which came out in the last
discussion and you I think Daniel
summarize very nicely is is there any
top down causation between the wave and
the neurons that are controlling my body
and my eyes um and um you know because I
could argue that it's all bottom up
causation and just rewriting neuronal
density Dynamics or population Dynamics
in Foria space yeah everybody does that
even to the extent of um focusing on the
relevant variables as the rate of change
of phase which Robert you were you
saying that a really interesting
interpretation yeah that is the kuramoto
model of neurodynamics uh you know this
has been around for decades people do
work in this space but the assumption is
that you are basically appealing to a
bottomup causation from some underlying
neur mortal computation at level of
neurons and then you're just lifting it
to a level of description in the in in a
in a poror space or in a phase space
with the right kind of Dynamics making
all the arguments that you have made in
favor of the wave hypothesis it seems to
me the important thing is a top down
causation that destroys theological
thing so I'm just trying to think about
tests of top down causality of course
not easy to do but I'm just wondering
you know if I squash your Thalamus would
you have different spatial cognition so
I preserve the connectivity but I
actually changed the shape of your
Thalamus things like that I think would
be more compelling demonstrations of the
top down causation which I think is at
the heart of your spatial wave
hypothesis that it's not just an
epiphenomenal bottomup consequence it
actually matters this wave my neurons
have to be immersed in this wave to
function properly and it matters where
they are and in that mortal sense it
matters um that these anatomical
constraints afforded that support this
wave will have an influence on
neurodynamics and subsequent belief
updating and movements and sense making
and projective geometries um so I don't
don't have an answer but I would love
look into you at at those things that if
you like address the notion of circular
causality from the point of view of
physics and in particular drill down on
what would it be mean to demonstrate
empirically top- down causation in the
sense or the spirit of George Ellis um
that that's what I took from that
conversation that exchange I I agree
hard
problem honestly I think even though
Carl you said you're just gonna you know
Babble or say rubbish I think that was
the most important point because that
touches on the things that we even
discussed in the in the Mortal
computation thesis framework um and that
was actually so I don't know if I have
the wonderful insightful answer that you
claimed I might produce but uh just to
speak to what you said and uh and what
Robert was discussing I think that is
what were lies the most important if
we're going to build computational
models which obviously appeal to me
quite a bit
uh in the moral computation thesis said
well okay the real way to do this is we
would take actual substrate like for
example a neuromorphic chip if we were
doing
artificial or we would work with
xenobots or anthr robots and build you
know little systems of these actual
biotic or chimeric type of systems but
we did discuss virtual morphology so I
think you could just go down to the
simulation route which touches on what
you said Robert about well we could
build waves we have examples of those
but those come with some difficulties we
could just simulate them and I think the
answer to answering the question how do
neurons couple to the waves and what
does that look like and how do we build
those computational might be one of the
most important questions I think in
building any testable computational
model and any useful simulation I do
think probably what I was saying in the
earlier discussion about looking at
resonator neurons or resonating Dynamics
uh which has some history and as well as
the cognitive math learner and the stuff
I've talk about holographic memory which
kind of Builds on the complex number
representation and the wave
representation and how do you encode
that in spiking Dynamics I think that
might be an interesting and useful
building block and I will send Daniel
and you some information and then you
could look and see if that's rubbish or
if that might be useful but I think that
might might be important building blocks
to actually building a workable
computational model I do think
simulating the wave could be interesting
to from a different direction I was
another thought that you produced was
from nature inspired metah huris
computation or optimization where we
model things like bumblebees and
beehives and ants and ant colonies and I
know Daniel has done work with ants as
well and likes them quite a bit um and
also we've done things with bats
echolocation and wave transmission so if
we model mathematical waves at least we
could use that or Frameworks for metah
heuristic computation and sort of
backwards build that let's say derive
the computational mechanisms that could
allow us to couple neurons to use that
information and then we could do actual
simulations of different wavs of
different properties we can model the
frequencies we can kind of control those
hyper parameters and then in doing so we
could then look at
what Carl was then bringing up which is
the one of the key Essences of mortal
computation which is that spatial
Arrangement that anatomical organization
of uh neurons and their particular
components um then you could also do
tests like okay if we build them in a
spherical kind of construct or we build
them in such an anatomical construct
that um is conducive to those simulated
waves then you could do what Carl said
computationally which is we could change
the the shape of these anatom these
computational Thalamus models right we
can make them cubic or you know other
types of weird shapes and see if
squashing them changes for example how
these neurons respond on simple
cognitive tasks that we can emulate
again we could use very simple spatial
cognition tasks that we could simulate
and then we could start manipulating the
actual uh virtual morphology as Coler
would call it or just the virtual
anatomy and then that could give you
some at least computational tests of the
effect in value of wave computation um I
think that's the key and I'm not even
sure if what I just said mostly is
rubbish and uh just me kind of
generating what I would do if I had to
build something like that and I think
that might be one of the single most
important questions because I think it
answers both neuron models without waves
and neurons plus waves as you said we
need to build both those models and I
think that kind of coupling and that
modeling of that relationship is a first
step and then of course then you could
then start to look at actual physical
constructs that ulate that computation
kind of like a reverse we're using
computation to drive what we think the
structure should be and then say are
there actual structures that we find and
then we can constrain our models a
little bit better as we do have anatomic
or we do have computational models of
phalic structures like Chris alus group
has a phalus structure in their nango
framework uh again spawn I think has
like a Thalamus Arch component um so the
and those are very biophysically
grounded like they use anatomical values
things that are actually grounded from
neurophysiological data so that could be
an interesting starting point and that
could allow us to then actually test and
uh simulate what Carl was saying about
squishing and stretching and uh changing
the form of the thalamus so that's
something I thought might be worth
mentioning and that's where the Mortal
computation theis really comes in play
because again it's that specific
morphological Arrangement that actual
construction and relationship between
your owns that's really important and
changing that would change the
computation that's what another
byproduct of our framework was basically
saying is that you're not going to get
the same computation if you change the
anatomy if you change this um so that's
that's an important part and then just
quickly I wanted your last slide before
this one I don't know how to pronounce
the name of that uh that entity either
um but I thought that was really
interesting because it you were saying
it has essentially like a little eye but
it doesn't have any known neurons or
anything that we can perceive directly
so could that be neurons without
cognition and I think that gets at to
what uh uh Michael Levan and again Carl
and I site and talk with him a lot which
is the idea of Basil cognition and I
think that's kind of where we don't
really have that quite right from a
computational point of view so I do
think that's even more important to try
to model these uh Elementary cognitive
systems and again looking at these
building computational models I think of
like that single cell organism could be
valuable and maybe give us some insights
as to well okay what is it that we need
to get this thing to actually solve very
very simple tests like follow gradients
of chemicals which we do that in
chemotaxis and phototaxis experiments
and we do build little models uh of for
example Eola trying to Traverse these
little uh little in niches and I think
that's the other part that you're going
to need in building uh even simulated
versions of what you seek which is
you're going to need that virtual Niche
because again and you point out Robert
which I was happy to see that that you
know your what you're thinking is that
it's Elemental embodied but I think the
other part that can't be ignored if
you're going to properly uh examine and
simulate mortal Computing systems is you
need a niche need that more uh virtual
environment to actually and those
physical properties need to be very
explicit um when you build it so I think
that that was something that I think is
going to be also very difficult uh but
probably the most important to make the
next step for Mortal computation and bi
intelligence hopefully some of that made
sense no thanks Alex I I agree with you
that the simple animals the simple comp
simple brains are the place to look I I
was recall that quantum mechanics
started with the hydrogen atom not with
the uranium
atom I'll I'll actually kind of add a
complimentary view I was wondering to
what extent will the kind of
representationalist form and context for
the wave that you described in humans be
of maybe even a slightly different kind
in a single cellular or in an insect so
for example there's the outfielder
catching a Fly ball who yes you might be
able to describe that in terms of the
spatial temporal frequency of the
baseball moving through space and the
body moving through space there also may
be a horis such as following a gradient
of shade that also gives a behavioral
solution or even an indistinguishable
approach so th that may speak to again
the variety of possible substrates of
mortal computers because the insects
central
body and this is the to the empirical
Point how can we differentiate the
situation where spatial representation
is happening with or without a causality
closure from where behavioral strategies
are integrated like moving away from a
shadow for a fly it may not require the
spatial Precision on the object so
actually just determining where and how
variation across different species and
with across individuals and settings how
would we differentiate that from a null
hypothesis where neural or wave wave
particle or both or neither we don't
even need to invoke space we just invoke
reflexive
Behavior I agree that's a very important
question it's addressed a little bit in
the paper but what we need is tests of
insect behavior for instance which
depend on the 3D spatial model which
don't depend on just as you say
detecting a shadow or detecting a
looming thing uh and it's quite
difficult to devise those
tests yeah I'll read a question from the
live chat and anyone can can give a
thought okay Courtney writes thank you
for the interesting talk could this
Theory be used to test whether or not
someone in the ICU with brain damage is
conscious and if so to what degree could
it be tested similarly to integrated
information Theory or are we far away
from something like
that I'd say we're far away because even
experimentally finding the wave
is far away we have to work out what the
biophysics of of it is before we can
build detectors for it and that may be
as far away as as detection of dark
matter or for the neutrino for instance
that was theoretically predicted it took
25 years to find it experiment I think
it may take a long time to find a wave
experimentally so in terms of measures
of Consciousness I'd say we're a long
way
off thanks um Ken deid any please go for
it well I just wanted to mention one
thing um that this whole discussion
reminded me of a long time ago I think I
was in graduate school I read a
book by Ralph D Ellis not to be confused
with the George Ellis that um that Carl
mentioned but it's called a book called
an ontology of Consciousness and if if
my memory serves it defends just the
general idea that Consciousness is a
wave um and defends the kind of w wave
medium model for thinking about the Mind
Body problem and I I just remember it
being very interesting but I don't but
that's so long ago that you might read
it I might read it now and be totally
disappointed but just something to throw
out there send me the reference that be
great yeah yeah Ralph DL I can send you
that an ontology of Consciousness but I
do remember being being struck by it as
being sort of plausible but you know how
those things go it's like it's
metaphysics it's
ontology you know yeah you're pretty far
away from physical testing but in terms
of some of the sort of theoretical
advantages of thinking about it that way
it might be worth a
look I'll put it in the chat thank you
de any thoughts and then anyone watching
can write any last questions and then
otherwise Robert let's hear like what
are your next moves and just kind of
summarize the commentary
affordance maybe I I can you know I
I this is a kind of question that you
know anybody interested in topic
struggle with in kind of okay what is
the sort
of Integrative mechanism uh that is
required to understand things like
Consciousness uh or does it relate to
the brain with all the limitation of
both you know theoretically and
methodologically of of contemporary
Neuroscience uh I'm totally open now at
this point to the possibilities that
yeah there is you know some form of
physics that we haven't understood about
the brain or that is related to the
brain or interact with the brain and
becoming like even open to some form of
you know physical dualism I don't know
you would call that uh I'm sure that
it's it's going to be very hard to
progress with that that we are still at
a sort of metaphysical age of this type
of Science and discoveries uh we don't
have the principle yet maybe uh I doubt
but I'm not a physicist so it's really
like you know talking that Einstein
condensate will address the question I
mean think about the the size that has
been achieve the maximal size of both
Einstein condensate and under what
circumstances irrespective of you know
okay uh temperature issue you know but
it's what like a picol lit like billion
atoms um so you would have like billions
and billions of bosen shin condensate
that would have I mean it's it seems as
I I don't I I don't have a good gut
feeling about it
but uh there is also more mundane things
like you know we had this discussion
about uh electromagnetic wave in the
brain at the kind of micro scale or
mesoscale as EP phenomenon but as I said
before although I don't recall the names
of the authors working on that but there
is a bunch of labs and researcher
working on that uh there is now or at
least there's some theoretical well
formulated ated theoretical ground and
some empirical evidence for inductive
mechanism in the brain basically you
have you know currents going through uh
um your axon bundles of fibers uh you
know your action potential if you wish
that are associated with those currents
that induce electromagnetic wave that
propagate and may have a role of for
instance synchronization with another
bundle just next to it so are those
things are very minute as effects
apparently uh they don't have a very
very large long range uh um effect
that's because of biophysical constraint
if I recall well but it talks about the
possibility that you know we may not
want to throw the baby out of the bath
water classical electrom magnetism may
still have something to say and in
particular if this kind of induction
mechanism uh which is literally top down
I mean the downward cation if you wish
you know there is a fiber bundle that
generate electromagnetic waves that then
affect currents in another fiber bundle
we could say well you know then you
could imagine something quite
sophisticated and in which the role of
anatomy the grow Anatomy the shape of
the brain the organization then might
become uh very important to understand
because of course the relationships if
those electromagnetic wav induction are
short range you know how you bring
anatomically things closer in order to
make them interact becomes very
important and maybe that connects back
to your thalamic hypothesis but again
what I'm talking about is very very very
speculative thanks
yeah I agree um my my feeling is the
biophysics is wide open so
electromagnetism May well be a part of
it and you used Mars levels earlier it's
possible the wave is has different
implementations like I think this
conversation brought up a lot of
different
dimensions and also even begets bigger
questions
like do scientific hypotheses have for
and against is there only one hypothesis
chosen or could there be
functionality distributed across
multiple biophysical systems such that
something being a AR true or false which
is kind of predicated the whole basian
epistemology that doesn't necessarily
need to be true there could be utility
continua for a theory and a predictive
continua yeah I I
guess the hint is that since there's
ever a hint of the wave in both the
thalamus and insects and opposite ends
of the animal tree evolutionary tree
that the wave hypothesis might carry
across the whole lot and in which case
you ask is it convergent evolution and
different species different branches or
did it go right back to the pre
primordial Branch before the Cambrian
era I would like it to go right back
yeah in that case you can consider like
arthropods or look how far back but
insects are only one kind of arthropod
and they have yeah enough homology that
you might be able to extend this
argument
and do ancestral State
reconstruction on neuroanatomy at
different levels and these analyses may
have already been done and then the
allometry of those reconstructions can
be compared
to yeah any last comments or um Robert
with last
word yeah well many thanks to all of you
for for your comments
um it's been most useful and I
guess I just finally request if I I
would like to have to get some
commentary from all sorts of people on
this hypothesis so if you would send me
some comments just initial ones and gut
reaction comments if you like uh on this
core question of can we dismiss the wave
hypothesis or do we need to take it
seriously then that would uh kind of
kick off some of the commentary anyway
many thanks
thank you to all the guests and thank
you Robert all right farewell thank you
bye everyone bye thank you

## p7iq4AAIwjc

Hello, welcome everyone.
We are in Active Inference Guest Stream 82.5 on April 14th, 2025, discussing computers,
meaning, and consciousness with Robert Borden and guests and guests.
So, Robert, thank you for joining and for assembling this group to you to kick off this discussion.
Thank you. Hi, thanks everybody for attending.
I'm going to be talking, as it says, on computers, meaning, and consciousness.
Let me get straight into it.
What I'm going to be talking about is largely negative results,
and here are the two key negative results of this talk.
One is that the information inside a computer doesn't define what the computation is about,
and that is because information in a computer is encoded.
And the second negative result is that if the brain is only a computer,
if it's thought of as only a computer, then it cannot be conscious.
So those are two quite paradoxical results, and I expect you to be puzzled by them.
As I go through, I would really be grateful if people would put up their hands at any time,
and if there's something that's really perplexing about it, ask a question,
because very much my purpose is to find out what people don't understand about these results.
And I think the argument to these results is a fairly simple argument,
but it's paradoxical and counterintuitive,
and I expect people to be puzzled, and I would like people to speak up when they are puzzled.
Okay.
So those are the negative results I'm going to be talking about.
And this is one way to remember them.
It's like an incompleteness theorem for computers.
And what it says is the physical events inside a computer don't define what it computes.
They don't define what it's about.
And this, as I say, is because the information is encoded,
external information is required in order to interpret or decode the physical events in a computer as a computation.
So that's basically what it's about, an incompleteness theorem, a negative result.
I think as an incompleteness theorem, it can be quite important.
However, I've got another slide here.
So basically, to try and understand the results,
the first result is not original result,
is that computation itself is not a physical process in itself.
It is our interpretation of a physical process,
an interpretation made by an external interpreter,
usually people, but sometimes not people,
using a decoding of the physical events in the computer.
And the information running inside a computer is encoded,
so it doesn't of itself have meaning until you decode it.
And without decoding, the physical events inside a computer don't have meaning,
and they're not actually about anything.
And the puzzle here is that consciousness is about things,
whereas the things in a computer are not about things.
Now, this result that computation is not a physical process,
but an interpretation of a physical process,
that's not a new result.
It was derived by Horstman et al. in 2014
for artificial computers
and extended to natural computers such as brains
by Stepney and Kendon in subsequent years.
So those two papers are very interesting precedents to the work here.
So that's the first part of it,
is that computers don't have any decoded meaning inside them.
The second part is applying that to consciousness,
because consciousness that we experience has meaning.
It's about things.
It's about the things in front of us,
the things we see, the things we feel, and so on.
But without decoding,
the computation in the brain doesn't have meaning.
And the decoding requires information from outside the brain.
So if you model the brain purely as a computer,
then the physical events inside the brain don't have meaning,
and so they can't be the cause of consciousness.
So that is the basic framework for the results.
It's a negative result.
They are negative results.
And I think negative results are important in science.
A lot of precedents, like conservation of energy,
is if you like a negative result,
says energy can't be created out of nowhere.
So it leads to things like no perpetual motion machines.
Well, the second law of thermodynamics says
you can't create heat differences out of nothing.
And so there's no such thing as a free heat engine.
Or another one more recent is Gödel's incompleteness theorem for mathematics.
And that says you can't derive all of mathematics purely axiomatically.
So these are important negative results.
And what negative results do is they clear the ground and make room for new ideas.
So the result of this talk is an incompleteness theorem for computers.
Excuse me, a bit harsh.
And I hope to show you that the result has far-reaching implications,
firstly for man-made computers, and secondly for cognitive science.
And so if you think you see a flaw in this argument,
please put your hand up and ask me about it,
because that's the kind of thing I want to understand about.
So I'll proceed by a series of analogies going from books to computers to brains.
These are all physical devices, and inside the devices,
inside a book or inside a computer, all the information is physically encoded.
And without decoding, the information has no meaning,
and the decoding is always done outside the device.
So a consequence of that is the device itself is not conscious.
Now, it feels all right for books.
It feels a bit more troubling for computers and very troubling for brains.
Anyway, well, let's set off down this journey and see how far we go.
Inside each of the devices,
the information in the device has no meaning.
It's quite obvious for a book that
words, characters inside a book have no meaning,
but it becomes less obvious for computers and for brains.
So let's go through that progression and see how we go.
Yes, I just have a question to be sure.
What is the ground to assert that within the brain,
bearing in mind that actually we do not understand the brain very well at this point,
there is no encoding and decoding mechanism of sorts?
Well, I think the modern view is that there is encoding and decoding,
but it doesn't happen inside the brain.
In other words, the sense organs encode things like light as pulse trains,
neural spike trains.
They go into the brain as encoded information.
And then the brain does something with them.
Lots of things about neuron spike trains.
And then spike trains come out of the brain and they are decoded as muscle actions.
So the picture of the brain has encoding and decoding,
but it doesn't actually happen in the brain.
It happens in the body, in the sense organs or in the muscles.
I think it's something that could be discussed,
bearing in mind again that there are probably fundamental mechanism within the brain
we do not yet fully understand.
Oh, yes.
Let's assume it's a postulate.
Okay.
More than something that is...
Well, I think it's...
I think I can assume that any information in the brain is encoded.
We know all we find in the brain is neural spike trains.
And if that is information about the world, it's certainly encoded.
Anyway, let's go from books to computers to brains,
and then we'll see how it feels.
So in a book, there are physical squiggles on the page, as shown here.
And we do a lot of interpreting of those in order to understand the book.
We understand the shapes of the ink shapes as letters.
We understand strings of letters as words,
and word strings as sentences,
sentences as meanings,
and meanings as stories.
So finally, after all that interpretation, all that decoding,
we understand what the meaning is in the book.
But to get the meaning from the book,
we've had to do a lot of decoding.
By the way, I shall use the word interpret
and the word decode fairly interchangeably throughout this talk.
And I think they obviously don't have entirely the same meaning,
but I think they're pretty synonymous for these purposes.
But you may want to catch me up on that sometimes and say,
look, you've used these words differently.
So that's what meaning is in books.
It's not physically inside the book.
It's inside our heads when we read the book.
So we go on from books to computers.
And physically, what's going on inside a computer is digital electronics.
We understand the laws of physics and how all that stuff,
all those circuits work.
But again, to understand it as a computer,
we do a lot of interpretation.
We interpret the voltages in the circuits as bits.
We interpret bit strings as numbers.
We interpret numbers as being solutions to equations
or whatever we've done.
And we sometimes interpret those equations
and models of physical things.
We have a computer simulation of anything in the world.
And that's the way we understand it,
by doing all that decoding, all that chain of decoding.
So when do we do that?
There's a lot of decoding information in our heads,
which I say is not inside the computer.
The computer just has physical digital electronics.
So we go further to brains.
Physically, what happens in brains is neurons firing.
And as I say, what has started those neurons firing
is sense organs like eyes and fingers
sending spike trains to the brain
recording information about the world.
But that information is encoded as spike trains.
Then the spike trains are interpreted in the brain
in various ways.
I use it as we interpret the brain as a computer,
doing Bayesian probability, for instance.
So we may think that the spike trains in the brain
have a meaning as probabilities of things
and probabilities of events.
And we interpret synaptic connection strength
in the brain as learning and memory.
And then spike trains come out of the brain
to our muscles.
And our muscles decode the spike trains
as motor actions.
So again, there is encoding
before stuff goes into the brain.
Stuff inside the brain is encoded.
And then there's decoding when it comes out of the brain.
So those are the three devices.
And to sort of draw the generalization across those,
in all three cases, there's a chain of interpretations.
There's a chain of decoding, which says
we decode A as B, as B as C, as C as D,
and so on and so on.
And we decode voltages as bits, bits as numbers,
numbers as solutions to equations,
or whatever it may be,
or numbers as being about things.
And at each link of this decoding chain,
there is very many possibles.
There's no one obvious choice.
There's a vast number of possible interpretations.
And when we do this interpretation,
it's us decoding.
And we need information to do that decoding.
We need to know things about how computers work,
or things about how the brain works,
or things about what problem we've set the computer.
And so that's how we've set up our interpretations.
But there's a huge number of wrong interpretations
we could set up instead.
But the important point is
the information we use to decode
resides outside the device.
And that means that there may be information inside the device,
but it doesn't have the meaning that we apply to it.
And the consequence of that, I would say,
is that the device itself is not conscious.
And so we've gone through this progression
from books to computers to brains.
And the question is,
is there anywhere along that trail
where something different happened?
And I claim there's not anywhere
that something different happened.
The whole issue of encoding and decoding
is the same for all three of those devices.
So an example of a computer
is a floor cleaning robot.
Now, you know how these work.
Initially, it blunders around the room
and bumps into doors and things.
And it's been designed with an onboard computer
which has a digital map of the room
with things in it
and representation of things
like chairs and tables and so on.
And so once it's bumped into a table,
it doesn't bump into the table again.
And so it has the map inside it,
which is encoded information.
And the decoding of that information
happens outside the computer
when the computer sends commands
to the motor and to the steering
to avoid the table leg.
And the decoding also happens
in the designer's mind,
where the designer has,
he knows what the memory locations
in the computer mean.
But there's no information in the computer
which defines what the information means.
In other words,
it's got a bunch of memory locations,
but it doesn't know
which memory locations refer
to particular objects
in the outside world
or particular places.
So the computer on the robot
can't look at its memory locations
to be aware of the table leg.
And this is illustrating
the general point
that the physical events
inside the computer
don't define
what it's computing about.
And I think one of the reasons
people find that puzzling
is that when people talk
about computers,
they use a lot of metaphors
and even the word computer
is a metaphor for people.
And these metaphors
make computers sound like people.
And those are the metaphors
that I think have missed letters
and made this sound puzzling
to many of us.
Where do we go next?
Another simple example
of a kind of computer
is an abacus.
Now there's an abacus
and what happens inside an abacus,
I think most people would say,
is not addition.
The physical process
inside an abacus
is beads sliding along wires.
But we've designed the abacus
so we can interpret it
as an adding machine.
So in some bazaar
in the Middle East
or something,
you see somebody
doing things on an abacus,
he is adding up numbers,
money, basically.
Now that's the way
we interpret the abacus
as a computer
which does additions.
But we could interpret
the same physical device
in many different ways.
We could have used it
as a model of sheep
in the meadow.
Or we could have used it
as a model of fish on the moon.
We could have used it
for fortune telling.
Or we could have used it
for multiplying.
I'll just talk about
multiplying briefly.
If you imagine
those red beads
as being digits
in a number like
10,000,
1, 0, 0, 0.
Every time you move
a bead over
to the right-hand side,
you're multiplying
the number
on the right-hand side
by a factor of 10.
So in that sense,
if we used abacuses
that way,
they would be
multiplying devices,
not adding devices.
So again,
the physical events
that happen
inside the abacus
don't define
what computation
is going on.
It's people
that encode the inputs
and decode
the outputs.
and in terms
of the previous
analysis of computers
from Horstman
and Stemny
and company,
people are called
representing entities
who interpret
the abacus
as an adding machine.
They do the encoding
and they do the decode.
So the first set
of consequences
of this viewpoint
are consequences
for man-made computers
and particularly
artificial intelligence.
And the first
consequence is
you may have heard
there's quite a popular
idea around
amongst philosophers
and others
that we might be
living inside
a simulation.
In other words,
there might be
some grand simulation
of the universe
which simulates
everything,
the world
and people
and things
and we're just
existing inside it.
Now this
interpretation
of computers
shows that's
not the case.
In other words,
if you have a big
simulating computer,
information inside it
is encoded.
Sorry,
I can't quite read
some of my slides
because the picture
is in front of it.
So the simulated
things don't exist
inside the computer.
They exist
inside the heads
of the people
looking at the
computer outputs.
And so there are
no simulated people
inside a computer
so we cannot be
simulated people.
A second consequence
which again
is quite topical.
there's a lot
of discussion
about AI
advancing and
becoming more
intelligent and
there's the idea
of AI super
intelligence which
completely exceeds
all human
intelligence.
Again,
if you take this
interpreted view
of computers,
that can't happen
because
inside an AI
computer,
any computer
doing AI,
there is only
digital electronics.
there's not
meaning about
things.
All the
intelligence
in AI
computer is
encoded information
and it takes
people to
decode it.
And so
when we talk
about AI,
all the
intelligence lies
not inside
the machine
but in human
interpretation
of the outputs.
And as an
example of this,
Deep Blue
played wonderful
chess,
but it only
played great
chess because
Garry Kasparov
thinks it
played great
chess.
Another more
humble example,
you may have
heard the old
wartime computer
called ENIAC
which was very
good at printing
log tables.
It could print
log tables much
better than
people could
print log tables.
But it only
printed great
log tables because
people were able
to read them and
say, yes,
these are great
log tables.
So if an AI
computer does
something which
you might want
to call super
intelligence,
produces outputs
that nobody can
understand because
it's beyond all
human intelligence,
it's actually not
intelligence at all.
It's not intelligence
until humans
interpret it.
It's just
electronics.
Now, these two
results are quite
against the tide
of what a lot of
people believe.
The way to
remember them
is that inside a
computer, there is
no decoding.
So there's no
decoding is needed
to make meaningful
information and
therefore, people,
simulated people and
AI superintelligence
do not exist inside
computers.
So to go back to
the analysis which
was the origin of
this, Postman
in 2014 showed that
computing is not
just a physical
process.
It's an
interpretation of a
physical process by
something they call a
representational
entity, an RE here.
Now, the RE is the
thing that encodes the
inputs to the
computer and decodes
the outputs.
And the important
thing to know is
that the information
used by the RE to
decode resides in
the RE itself, not
inside the computer.
computer.
And so this
applies, firstly, they
applied this to
man-made computers
because that's their
interest.
But they extend it
then to artificial
computers, to
biological computers.
And in this case, the
representational entity
which interprets the
brain as a computer
is the animal's body
because it's the sense
organs that encode the
information on the
way in and it's motor
actions, muscles, which
decode the information
on the way out.
And again, we get this
result applying to
brains.
The physical events
inside a brain don't
define what it's
computing about.
Okay.
Yeah, just a question.
I think I understand
where you're coming
from when you state
realized that the body
is the decoder or is
where decoding of
neural information is
enacted.
But I think it's also
a huge assumption.
And I would, for
instance, ask you what
you think happens when
we have a reminiscence,
when we recall something
from memory and it's
very vivid, for instance,
or like in dreams or
in imagination, where we
may imagine ourself
moving as a body in
space.
Yeah, for sure.
But the body is not
actually, that's
something we could
discuss in the fine
details.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But okay.
Well, where I'm going
is that most theories
of consciousness and the
brain see the brain as
only a computer.
And what I'm saying
is if the brain is
only a computer, the
information inside it
can't have meaning and
there cannot be
consciousness.
What I'm going to say
is the brain is more
than just a computer.
There's something else
in the brain besides a
computer.
And I'll come to what
that is.
And that is the thing
that is conscious when
we have memories or
when we make plans or
imagine things or
whatever else it might
be.
Okay.
So that's where I'm
going.
The brain is a
computer, but it's not
only a computer.
There's something else
in there.
Okay.
So brain...
Thank you.
Yeah.
Just, I should have
stopped by apologizing.
I have to go to a TMB
meeting in a few
minutes, but I think
it's a fascinating
argument.
I just wanted to put a
question that I'm hoping
you can come back to
later on.
Again, acknowledging I
think this is a really
interesting approach and I
suspect you're absolutely
right.
However, at the back of my
mind, I'm wondering how
many of these philosophical
arguments have accommodated
the free energy principle
that is just the statement
that any physical process is
just a process of computation
in the sense of belief
updating.
So that all the internal
elements of your brain and a
computer that can be read as
a process as opposed to a
book or an abacus, which is
not a process, can be read as
belief updating, basically,
whose physics move on a
statistical manifold.
And just by using those kinds
of semantics and translating
things like interpretation,
decoding, observation,
measurement, these are just
processes of inference.
In that reading of physical
processes, you have meaning
baked in.
So the whole point of the free
energy principle is that the
physical process encodes or
stands in for a
parameterization of beliefs
about something.
There is an inherent intrinsic
meaning that is equipped or
equips all the physical
processes in virtue of the
free energy principle, because
you can distinguish the
physical process from the
support of the beliefs
entailed by that physical
process about things that are
not that physical process.
So that's the whole point of the
Markov blanket, that now you have
an information theory, an
information geometry that allows
you to have beliefs about things
which are just meaning.
So my question is, how much of
this philosophical work and, you
know, can you apply the second law
of Gödel's theorem to open
systems that have a distinction
between the encoding of beliefs
by the inside about the outside?
So that would be my challenge.
Oh, I've still got two minutes
left to wit it, but I'm not.
I'm going to listen to
Brianna's question.
Thank you, Karl.
It's a very profound question,
and I do come to some of it
later, but I'll try to address it
properly later.
Brianna?
Hi.
Thanks for having me here.
And it's a fascinating argument.
I'm curious about the comments on AI.
So AI runs on an emulated substrate.
So it's remarkably similar to how it
works in human cognition.
And I wonder if we're not taking
into consideration that it's the
substrate is emulated.
I think the argument, I mean, AI
is complicated because it runs on
digital computers.
They're doing digital electronics
and bits and bytes, and they are
usually simulating neural nets.
And the neural nets are something
like what the brain works.
And so it's a very complicated
situation.
But fundamentally, there is still at
the bottom level, a lot of encoding
going on, and a lot of decoding is
needed to make any sense of it.
So that's a question that leads in a
lot of directions.
But fundamentally, there's always
encoding, and decoding is always
required.
There is, and it would be on top of
the emulated substrate, which just
Yeah, you have to decode at this
level.
You have to decode the bits and bytes
as simulating a neural net.
You have to decode the neural net as
producing conclusions.
So there are many levels, usually in
computers, there are many, many levels
of virtual machine going on, and many
levels of decoding you have to do to
get to the meaning.
All I need is one level of decoding.
That's enough.
Sure.
That's my question.
Okay.
Or my remark.
Sorry, I'll carry on.
So now we're coming on to brains and
consciousness.
We take three statements, which I
think are fairly widely believed.
One is that consciousness is caused by
events inside the brain.
Number two is that consciousness has
meanings about external things like
coffee cups or the presentation or
your computer screen.
And the third point is that the brain is
a neural computer and only a neural
computer.
Now, these statements, I will claim, are
not mutually consistent.
One of them has to be wrong.
The reason is, if the brain is only a
neural computer, all the information
inside is encoded and has no defined
meaning.
So that information can't cause
consciousness of things, consciousness
with meanings inside.
And if you look at those three
statements, the first two, I think, are
empirical facts.
And we can come back to discuss that
later.
But most people believe that consciousness
is caused by events in the brain because
when brains are damaged, consciousness gets
interrupted.
And you can't be conscious.
Most of the things you're conscious of are
something happening in the brain.
And it has meaning about external things.
I think those two are well-established facts.
So the third is an assumption.
We're only assuming that computing is the
only thing that goes on in the brain.
So I think three is the thing that's wrong.
Now, where do we?
So that runs straight up against a
philosophical assumption called
computational functionalism.
Computational function is a thesis that
performing the right kind of computations is
sufficient and necessary and sufficient for
consciousness.
And this is described recently as a
mainstream, although disputed, position in
the philosophy of mind.
Now, it's also called computational
sufficiency.
David Chalmers called it that in an article
in 2012.
And what the results of the first half of
this talk imply is that that is wrong.
In other words, being a computer is not
sufficient to be conscious.
Now, most theories of consciousness assume
computational functionalism.
They are theories in which the brain is a
computer and the brain has consciousness by
virtue of being a computer.
So the implication of this viewpoint is that
those theories of consciousness cannot be
correct.
And that is the main implication of this talk
for theories of consciousness.
So to talk about some specific theories of
consciousness, most of them assume that
consciousness is caused by events of the
brain.
The brain is a complicated neural computer,
the most complicated machine in the universe
we see here.
And inside this computer, there are various
computational processes taking place.
And I call these P1, P2, and so on.
And most theories of consciousness assume that
one or other of these processes called P5 or
P4 causes consciousness.
And so you can look at examples of modern
theories of consciousness from this viewpoint.
You might think P1 is representing things in
the visual field.
Theories of consciousness like Lame, like, yeah,
Lame and so on.
People believe those theories.
Or you might think, as in the free energy
principle, that the brain is building Bayesian
models of reality.
And that leads to consciousness.
Or you might feel some higher order theory of
consciousness that P3 is the brain reflecting on
its own computations.
And that causes consciousness.
Or going with Antonio Damasio, you might feel that
the brain is computing an emotional response to
events.
And that emotional response is the heart of
consciousness.
Or you might feel, along with Bernard Baars and
Dehane and others, that global workspace is what
makes us conscious.
So making information globally available is a
computational process.
Or you might feel, along with IIT, that you need
computations linked together with some very high
connectivity, which is measure five.
Or you might think that P7 is predictive coding.
All of those you're saying some computational process is
what makes the brain conscious.
The point of this talk is that those processes, P1 or P2 or
whatever they are, don't happen inside brains.
They happen in our interpretations of brains as computations.
But from the information actually inside the brain itself, the
processes could be completely different processes.
They could be Q1, Q2 and so on.
And so those theories of consciousness cannot work.
And if you want a short code, a memonic for why those
theories of consciousness cannot be right, it is those
theories of consciousness treat the brain as a computer.
So they have encoding, but they don't have decoding.
And so they can't get consciousness has decoded meaning in it.
And so a theory which only has encoding, but no decoding,
can't get decoded meaning.
And we go back again now to the example of a floor-cleaning robot,
just to illustrate what that means.
Supposing in a floor-cleaning robot, we can go and talk to the designer
or read the design handbook and get a complete theory of how the
robot computer works.
Supposing we've done that for brains, supposing we have a complete
model about all the neurons in the brain, what they're doing.
And so we happen to know that a particular computational process
called visual perception is implemented by certain neurons we can point
at in the brain, neurons N1, N2, and so on.
Or there's another process, higher order computing, that's done by
a different set of neurons.
And you can divide that set.
You can say the higher order computing about an object B is done by
process P4B, and that is done by certain neurons which we've identified
called N4B and so on and so forth.
And so there we are.
We've made great progress in cognitive science, understanding how the brain works.
And now we've proposed a theory of consciousness.
So we say the consciousness of object B in our visual field is caused by process P4B.
So what form would that theory take?
What we're trying is information physically inside the brain, including the information
in neural events N3B and the particular neurons, causes awareness of object B.
But this theory is not possible.
Because information inside the brain doesn't define which neurons are the group N3B.
Inside the brain is not known which neurons are N3B.
There might be any neurons.
So, and the information to decode N3B as the process P3B doesn't exist inside the brain.
And so there's no possible theory in which consciousness arises from physical events
inside the brain.
To go back to the Roomba example, the robot example, the robot has memory with loaded memory
locations, one of which represents a table leg.
But it doesn't, the robot itself doesn't know which memory location represents the table leg.
So the robot itself cannot be conscious of the table leg.
And it's an exact parallel I claim between those two cases.
So, I would like to pause at this point.
I'll ask people to chip in with questions, doubts, and so on.
I'll just restrain the incompleteness theorem.
The physical events inside a computer don't define what it computes.
And the external information is required to interpret those events as a computation
and to give them any meaning.
So, a few questions for you.
Is this a correct viewpoint of computation?
Is it just a physical process?
Or does it require an external interpreter or decoder?
And do modern theories of consciousness have any decoding built into them?
Or if they don't, what does it imply for those theories?
So, I will pause and anybody who wants to put their hands up or come up with objections.
Yeah, Kenneth, then anyone else.
Yeah, thanks, Robert.
I mean, I think, you know, I was reminded when I was looking at your slides earlier and then now again,
that this was all debated for a long time, actually, in the late 80s and early 90s,
particularly kind of famously by John Searle and Daniel Dennett.
So, Searle on one side and Dennett on the other.
You know, Searle kind of, in a way, made most of his or a big chunk of his philosophical career
just going around giving the Chinese room argument.
Absolutely, yeah.
And Dennett, I mean, in a way, Dennett's response was something,
it was, you know, it was kind of unclear, but it sort of bordered on illusionism some of the time.
Yeah, yeah.
And then sometimes a kind of incoherent position where it seemed to presuppose
that you could take the intent, what Dennett called the intentional stance,
which is to interpret entities as exhibiting intentionality.
So for Searle, you know, the vacuum cleaning computer robot,
the vacuum cleaning robot, it's as if it wants to, you know,
vacuum stuff and make a map of the room, but it doesn't literally do it.
It just sort of has a structure that's sufficient for us to go,
oh, it's as if it maps the room, but it doesn't literally map the room, right?
And of course, Dennett wanted to either say that all intentionality is all,
is as if intentionality,
and that as if intentionality meant adopting the intentional stance
and interpreting an entity as if it had intentionality.
So then if you apply that to yourself,
what is your interpreting activity?
Is it intentional or not?
So Dennett, that's the kind of the incoherent.
I'm not as if.
I mean, I know I'm not as if.
Yes.
Oh, of course, Dennett would say, oh, no, you don't know that.
Right?
So, yeah.
Yeah.
Those, I mean, those questions are very important questions.
And I would go back even further than John Searle to Leibniz,
the Leibniz mill,
the cogs inside the mill.
Do they know anything about the wind sort of thing?
Sure.
But John Searle made the Chinese room argument
that said computers can't have meaning inside them.
And to my mind,
nobody produced a satisfactory answer.
Yeah, I agree with you on that.
I've always thought that.
I think, like,
there was a lot of debate about it.
It lasted to about the mid-90s,
and then people just quit talking about it.
Well, also, David Chalmers.
Yeah.
I mean, I think David Chalmers came back to it
in about the 2000s.
He said computation is a causal network of causal topology,
and that has meaning.
I think his answer was unsatisfactory,
but we could talk about that.
But I think, basically,
nobody's really answered John Searle.
And the conclusion that I'm reaching
is that it agrees with John Searle
that you need something else besides computers
going on to get consciousness.
I see that.
And then there's also, you know,
those old sort of famous results
in mathematical logic.
I mean, other than girls in completeness theorems.
I'm talking about the Lervenheim-Skolem theorems.
Gosh.
Where you can have, you know,
non-standard models of domains
where it's like just a first-order, you know,
model of even arithmetic
doesn't really capture arithmetic.
Yeah, sure.
No, I'm...
It requires a kind of,
oh, we're going to interpret it as just being this.
And then I may have gotten that one wrong,
but there are results like that.
And then there's the whole issue
of the non-categoricity of first-order models.
Yeah.
So it's like second-order.
But we don't have a good idea
of how to compute second-order models
to get categoricity.
No, no.
My views on mathematics are unpopular.
I would say mathematics...
I mean, everybody sees mathematics
as this separate abstract domain.
Actually, I think
certain elementary facts of mathematics,
like 2 plus 2 equals 4,
they're about numbers.
They're not abstract.
And they are experimental facts.
And they agree with the data.
When you have two things
and add two things,
you get four things.
And we've learned that.
Yeah.
But I thought, you know,
in terms...
The only alternative
a computationalist has here
is to say something like
there are objective facts
that pertain to, say,
what a computation...
what a realized computation computes
that are kind of intrinsic to it.
And that's almost...
This is exactly...
Yeah, that's almost
a kind of Pythagorean position
you would have to hold.
Well, I think that is
straightforwardly wrong.
In other words,
I can have a computation
like a logical AND gate.
I can have two 1s make a 1.
But I can interpret that
either as an AND gate
or if I interpret...
If I change around and say,
no, 1 means true
and false and 0 means true,
I can say,
no, it's not an AND gate.
You're not doing AND,
it's doing OR.
Or again,
in terms of bitwise operations,
I can say,
this operation on bits
in the computer
is an addition.
Or I can say,
no,
I haven't represented...
used bits to represent
1, 2, 3, 4.
I've used bits to represent
1, 10, 100, 1,000.
So the operation
it's actually doing
is multiplication.
And so there is no objective fact
about what operation,
what computation is doing.
Yeah.
I mean,
if you think that,
then I think you're right.
So I've often thought this,
that what the computationalist
has to say
is that,
no,
there are objective facts
about what
certain realized
computational structures
compute.
And maybe,
was Carl saying
something like that
before he got up
about the free energy?
I think he was,
yeah.
Yeah.
It's a shame
because I've got
slides coming up
about the free energy principle
and Markov blankets
and so on.
We could have discussed them then.
But anyway,
I'll get to discuss that
with Carl later
because I'm giving this talk
to the TNB later.
So,
but I think Carl
was sort of saying
that there is an interpretation,
a unique interpretation
of a computation.
And I think
there are just too many
counterexamples.
I think
any computation
you show me,
I can,
and you show me
your interpretation of it,
I can show you
another interpretation
that's just as good.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well,
when you said,
if I may say one last thing,
when you,
when you talked about,
and David mentioned this,
the sensory
and motor
encoding
as a kind of
locus
of real
representational
content,
is that how I,
yeah.
Sensory,
sensory organs
encode
and muscles
decode.
Okay,
why couldn't somebody
raise the same
objection
that you're raising
to computation
as
encoding,
meaning
to that process?
Because there again,
you might say,
well,
it depends,
you know,
to kind of look
at another
line of
theory of
intentionality,
theory of meaning,
theory of representation
that went on
around the same time,
there's,
for example,
Ruth Milliken's
sort of naturalistic
theory
that would allow you
to assign
a definite content
to sensory
and motor,
you know,
encoding
and decoding,
but it's all
kind of based
on evolutionary
history.
And if the
evolutionary history
were different,
but you had
exactly the same
physical inputs,
outputs,
and so on,
you would get
a different content.
And that's
kind of
an unsatisfaction,
to my way of thinking,
kind of unsatisfaction,
for,
it may be fine
with respect
to,
like,
what the body
is objectively
doing and what
it evolved for,
but in terms
of conscious content,
it seems to me
it's not going
to work.
It's too
externalist.
It makes it,
like,
even if I had
a completely
different evolution
and,
you know,
but I ended up
being this kind
of atom-for-atom
replica
of what I am now,
the contents
of my thoughts
don't really change,
it seems to me.
Well,
yeah,
I mean,
I would say
you can't throw
evolution away
like that,
or you can't
play with it
like that.
I think the brain
is a result
of evolution,
and evolution
has meant
that sense organs
have evolved
to encode
light and touch
and so on,
and muscles
have evolved
to do things,
and brains
have evolved
to make sure
that they do
the right things,
and all that
is a coherent
picture,
and I cannot
just pull that
apart,
basically.
So you,
if I understand
you,
you might,
you,
would you think
that you can't
play the same
objection
to the
representational
content
of sensory,
sensory encoding
and motor
decoding,
or however you
want to think
of it?
Well,
I think,
as you can play
a step back
a bit,
I think all
the theories
we have
in natural
science
or gas laws
or whatever
it might be
involve
encoding
and decoding,
and the
theory we have
of the brain
involves encoding
by sense organs,
involves decoding
by muscles,
so that is,
that theory
is a coherent
package
that we can
test against data
on its own,
whereas the
difficulty with
consciousness
is that
we don't
see the
decoding,
whereas we
know that
consciousness
is about
decoded
information,
but ordinary
physical theories
or theories
of the brain,
they always
have an
encoding bit
and a
decoding bit
and they
kind of
balance out,
so we've
got,
at the end
of the day,
predictions
we can test
against data
and we can
say this
theory is
right or
wrong,
so that's
roughly my
viewpoint,
but there's
a lot there,
we're getting
into deep
water.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Robert,
we've also,
of course,
emailed on
this,
but external
information is
required to
interpret those
physical events
as a
computation,
so I
think I'm
100% with
you on
relational
semiosis
and the
idea that
multiple
perspectives
could be
taken on
a
computational
process,
but what
causal
relevance
other than
actually
intervening
on the
internal
states
would those
external
states
have.
So those
interpretations
matter for
the
interpreter,
but unless
they re-enter
causally into
the target
system,
how do they
come to
matter for
the system
itself?
the
So,
I think that's
what I'm
going to
address on
the second
half of
the talk.
And again,
the whole
picture is
the computer
only picture
is radically
incomplete,
and you get
gaps like
that,
but there's
something else
comes along
which fills
the gap,
and that's
what I'm
going to
talk about.
Okay,
so,
that,
by the
way,
we can
come back
to that,
but that's
more discussion.
I thought
some people
might object,
might have
that question,
which in a
sense was
Carl's
question,
that isn't
every physical
thing a
computation?
And to a
certain extent,
I can regard
lots of
physical phenomena
as computation,
I can regard
a gas in
a cylinder
as a
computation,
and there
the encoding
is something
that gives
the gas
a certain
temperature,
but my
theory is
not just
gas in
a cylinder,
it's gas
plus a
pressure piston
which measures
the pressure,
and the
pressure piston
is what
does the
decoding.
So,
that's a bit
of a diversion.
I'd like to
move on from
this slide,
because that's
not what
the second
half of the
talk is about.
If anyone
wants to come
back to this
slide later,
I'm happy
to do so.
Now,
what's the
positive
proposal?
How can
brains be
conscious?
The
positive
proposal is
the brain
is a neural
computer,
but it's
not only
that.
Something
else is
happening,
and it
has to be
happening,
because we
know brains
are conscious,
and so we
need something
else to make
them conscious.
So,
what might
that something
be?
the proposal
here is
that the
extra
something is
an analog
model of
reality,
and that
an analog
model is
different from
what goes on
in digital
computers or
neural computers.
So,
what's an
analog
model?
Approach this
by examples.
A toy car
is an analog
model of a
real car,
or a map
is an analog
model of a
piece of
terrain,
scene,
or a
photograph
is an
analog
model of
some
scene.
So,
this gives
us some
idea of
what
analog
models are
about,
and I
claim we
try and
encapsulate this
in the definition
of what is an
analog model.
A model M
is an
analog model of
some physical
situation P,
if M has
the same
topology as
P.
In other
words,
if the
situation P
is
donut-shaped,
then M
is donut-shaped,
and there
is some
kind of
point-to-point
correspondence
between the
physical situation
P and the
model M.
So,
a point in
the model
is a
function of
a point in
the physical
thing,
and the
function F,
which relates
points in
model and
physical reality,
are a
continuous
function,
mathematically
it's a
fiber bundle,
I think,
and it
preserved
neighborhoods,
and it
preserved
spatial
binding,
so there
are things
in the
analog model
which are
like borders,
for instance,
borders on
a map,
which are
also borders
in the
real situation,
so some
of the
information
in the
model M,
in the
physical
situation P,
is reproduced
in the
model M,
but with
no encoding,
and so
there's certain
information you
can get out
of the
model M,
which doesn't
require decoding,
and that is,
I believe,
the secret to
consciousness,
that there is
an analog model
inside the
brain,
and that
model is a
source of
consciousness,
that model
doesn't need
any decoding,
so there can
be information
in consciousness
about external
things,
because it's
gone into the
analog model
without being
encoded,
so,
I should say
that I've
tried to
discuss
analog models
in a couple
of minutes,
but they're
not that
simple,
because you
could say
analog computation
requires external
decoding,
just like any
other form of
computation,
and that's
what I believe
also has
said,
and there's
been loads
of philosophical
debate about
what analog
modeling is,
people like
Gibson,
and so on,
and you
could say,
well,
you've given
the examples
maps and
photographs,
but they're
actually encoded,
they are
divisible,
you look very
closely at a
map,
you can divide
it into
little fibers
on the paper
and they've
got ink,
or they haven't
got ink,
and the ink
is an encoding
of information,
or you look
at a photographic
film and there
are molecules
of dye,
or you look
at a computer
screen,
there are pixels,
they're all
encoded,
however,
those aren't
the only
examples of
analog models,
there are
other analog
models which
aren't divisible,
for instance,
if you have
a lens,
the optical
image is a
model of
reality,
but it is
not divisible,
because you
zoom in very
closely on the
image,
you get to
the diffraction
limit,
and usually
get blurry,
so you cannot
keep dividing
an image from
a lens as
far as you
like,
similarly,
a hologram,
it's not
divisible,
because a
hologram is a
Fourier transform
of a spatial
distribution on
a film,
say,
and so you
can't zoom in
as close as
you like on
a hologram and
keep dividing
and dividing it,
and another
more exotic
example is a
single quantum
state,
that's not
divisible,
notoriously not
divisible,
and there are
some quantum
states which can
hold very large
amounts of
information,
macroscopic
amounts of
information,
and they
last longer,
they last a
long time,
most quantum
states get
dissipated in
10 to
minus 18
seconds and
don't last
at all,
but certain
quantum states
can last
very long
times,
and these
are bosons
and condensates,
they're things
like superconductors
or superfluids,
by the way,
Fran is watching
this talk,
I'm running
out of water,
so if she
could bring me
some water,
I'd be very
grateful,
so bosons
and condensates
are an
example of
quantum states
which can
exist for a
long time and
can hold a
lot of
information,
but they
are very
rare states
of matter,
so I
think people
say that
couldn't exist
in the brain,
but I think
we shouldn't
rule them
out because
evolution is
very clever,
so the
question of
analog
representations
in the
brain is
still, I
think,
an open
question,
and it's
a question
of
physics
or
biophysics
rather than
a
philosophical
mathematical
question,
right,
so what's
this got
to do
with
consciousness?
Analog
models have
spatial
binding,
in other
words,
they have
things like
boundaries
which map
to boundaries
in the
real world,
now our
conscious
experience
includes a
3D model
of local
space,
that's what
it's like
to be,
you see a
model of
your screen
in front
of you,
model of
your table
itself,
and that
model has
spatial,
oh my
wolf's
coming,
that's
great,
thank you,
that model
has spatial
binding,
and so
that model
could be
the source
of consciousness
with no
decoding
required,
so here
is the
positive
proposal,
the brain
as well
as a
computer
contains
an
analog
model
of
local
space,
and that
analog
model
is the
sole
source
of
consciousness,
and consciousness
is nothing
to do with
the neurons
in the
brain,
it's all
coming from
that
analog
model,
so that's
the positive
proposal,
and I'll
sketch a
bit,
so the
question you
might ask
is,
well you've
said there
might be an
analog
model of
space in
the brain,
what use
would that
be,
why would
it evolve,
would it
serve any
purpose,
would it
help the
brain do
any real
computing
brains need
to do,
and the
answer is
yes it
could be
very useful
because it
could store
a Bayesian
maximum likelihood
model of
what's going
on around
the animal
for limited
periods of
time,
say for a
few seconds,
it could be
the place
where all
the sense
data about
those animal
surroundings
get integrated
into a single
best likelihood
model,
and it could
persist this
information for
a fraction of
a second while
the animal
decides what
to do,
it could keep
this information
while the
animal classifies
the things
around it,
recognising
things that
they have to
do things
about,
it could be
used for
simulating and
planning what
the animal's
going to do,
and it could
be used for
comparing the
present situation
with past
situations like
memory and
learning.
so the
answer is
yes,
there could
be lots
of uses
for an
analogue
model in
the brain.
Could it
happen?
There is a
possible physical
form for the
model as a
wave excitation
and I've
written papers
about this,
but I'm not
going to
divert into
those papers
now because
that is
simply,
for the
purpose of
this talk,
just an
existent
proof,
to prove
that it
can be
done,
it could
be done,
if evolution
could use a
wave excitation
in the
brain to
store
information,
then that
could be
where the
analogue
model is
stored.
And just
to illustrate
that in
terms of
free energy
principle and
active
inference,
here is a
picture of
the classic
active
inference
FEP
model of
the brain.
The brain
is a
neural
computer and
it has a
Markov
blanket,
there's
an outer
Markov
blanket
between the
brain and
the rest
of the
world.
And the
sense organs
are outside
the Markov
blanket,
they encode
information
which comes
through the
Markov
blanket,
the brain
does
computation
and then
neural
spike trains
come out
of the
Markov
blanket and
they go
to muscles
which turn
into physical
actions.
So there
is encoding
and decoding
in this
computer model
of the
brain,
but there's
no decoding
inside the
brain.
so active
inference is
all about
this cycle
here where
the muscle
actions produce
all sorts of
changes in
the world
and they
come back
by a
sense
organ.
So active
inference
and the
FEP is a
very complete
and capable
model of
the brain,
but I
would claim
it cannot
give you
consciousness
because all
the information
in here is
encoded and
there's nothing
inside the
brain that
does the
decoding.
Decoding is
done on the
way out.
So how
would active
inference and
the FEP have
to be modified
to take
account of
consciousness?
It's as in
this diagram
here, you
have not only
an outer
Markov, you
have the
same senses
and muscles
in the
outer Markov
blanket as
you had
before, but
also as
well as the
computer in
the brain, the
gray computer
we've got
here, we've
got the
inner ring,
the inner
right, white
ring, which
is the
analog model
of local
space.
So what
happens is
sense data
comes in,
has encoded
the brain, and
then it gets
decoded again
into this
analog model.
And from
the analog
model it
gets encoded
and there's a
rapid iteration
of comparing
sense data
with the
model.
So that's
the way the
best possible
model of
local space
gets developed
inside the
brain.
and similarly
if the
animal wants
to plan
things, then
it extracts
information from
the analog
model about
the current
situation, it
does some
computation about
it, and it
puts back
what the
situation would
be if the
animal made
certain moves.
So if the
animal wants
to plan
certain movements,
this green
cycle here is
what happens.
and so in
this theory of
enhanced
accurate inference,
if you like,
there is an
internal analog
model as well
as the
computer, and
consciousness
arises solely
from that
internal analog
model.
The advantage
of that is
that if you
get consciousness
from the
analog model,
you don't
need to
decode it.
And the
analog model
is just
like what
consciousness
is just
like, so
there's no
decoding
involved, and
we've solved
the problem
which we
had with
purely neural
computer
models of
the brain.
Okay, so
that I
think is a
future
direction which
I would hope
active inference
would take
in order to
produce a
decent account
of consciousness,
and I
think that's
a promising
route.
So, just
to talk
briefly about
the future
for theories
of consciousness,
I think some
approaches, most
approaches to
theories of
consciousness
have this
brain as a
computer-only
assumption, and
therefore they
can't actually
account for
consciousness
because they
don't have
decoding.
But I think
some of the
theories do
have some
promising elements
in them.
I think the
global
workspace
theory,
there,
it's
compatible
with the
idea that
the global
workspace
could contain
an
analog
model of
space
somewhere in
the
thalamocortical
system.
Certain
people have
written,
Bjorn
Merker has
written about
consciousness
without
a
course.
Again, this
is compatible
with the
idea that
somewhere in
the
midbrain,
possibly
the
thalamus,
there is an
analog
model.
I'll talk
briefly on the
projective
consciousness
model, which
some of you
know very
well, and
that says
there is a
model of
space in
the brain,
which is a
projective
transform
model.
Although the
PCM doesn't
talk about
analog at all,
it does talk
of projective
transform
model.
It has
many
properties in
common with
our consciousness,
and I think
that is very
much a step
in the right
direction.
I've got a
more detail
working out
of this,
which I call
the projective
wave model,
that says
there is an
analog of
space in
the brain,
it's in the
thalamus,
it's in a
wave excitation,
or in
insects,
it's in the
central body,
and that's
the basis
of consciousness.
But that
is not really
the main
point of this
talk,
as you talk
about the
future,
is to
say we
need to
go in
some
different
direction,
because the
ordinary
computational
theories of
consciousness
are not
going to
hack it.
So that
is really
the end
of what
I have
to say
after
35,
how long?
No,
an hour.
So open
for discussion,
here are a
few questions.
Is there
any alternative
to having
an analog
model in the
brain?
Is there
some other
thing that
could be
the cause
of
consciousness?
Could it
be stored
in neurons,
or does it
have to be
stored in
some other
form,
such as a
wave?
And I
think this
has not
only implications
for consciousness,
but also
implications for
cognitive
models of the
brain.
If we
admit this
possibility,
does that
actually help
us produce
models of how
the brain
works?
Or
alternatively,
should we
just give
up on
theories of
consciousness?
So open
for questions.
May I jump
in?
Sure.
Let's go.
So one
thing,
just a second,
I'm going to
close my
door.
All right.
So one
thing to
bear in
mind with
respect to
this
discussion
about the
brain in
particular,
is that
for most
neurophysiologists,
brain
scientists,
not cognitive
brain
scientists,
as you
know,
who often
so are
not real
neuroscientists,
have said
and restated
when,
after computers
in their
digital
form,
so with
this encoding
and decoding
process involved
have emerged,
that the
brain is not
a computer
in the sense
that precisely
the brain
is an
analog
machine,
that neurons
do not
encode things
that actually
spike strains
are analog
signals.
So it's
actually the
core belief
of the
classical
neurophysiology
and computer,
sorry,
brain
scientists,
that the
brain is
not digital
but an
analog
machine
that has
analog
model of
the world.
Now in
the detail
how that
would work
and how
that would
generate
phenomenology
as the
subjective
experience
we have
is,
I guess,
another
question.
So I
think that
what you
are stating
is actually
very
classical
from the
perspective
of
neuroscience
but it
has been
forgotten
by a lot
of people
who are
in the
business
of
cognitive
neuroscience
and
myself
at some
point
I
thought
we have
to go
back
to the
analogy
between
mind and
brain
and software
and hardware
so
entailing
some sort
of encoding
decoding
through
virtualization
but that's
the theory
of mind
that I
don't know
what I believe
today.
but actually
what you
say is
about
can the
brain
be
considered
or part
of the
brain
or neurons
can encode
analog
model.
For most
neurophysiologists
that's already
the case.
How is
another
question?
So now
in terms
of the
particular
model
and
implementation
or form
of this
analog
model
I would
even
go further
and say
at this
point in
my career
and reflection
where I'm
actually
completely
lost
I'm
open to
anything
including
what I
used to
consider
as
sort of
science
like the
claims of
the Chalmers
about quantum
mechanics
why not
and even
some other
physics that
we don't even
know yet
and haven't
understood
in terms of
the brain
maybe
I'm going
to use
an analogy
like an
antenna
of source
receiver
and emitter
that connect
to physics
in which
consciousness
resides
we may
never
understood
so
the field
is open
for me
and
I'm
not shocked
by your
arguments
I think
it's worthwhile
to pursue
but I don't
have a definite
answer
neither
of
what it could
be
this analog
model
or even
if there is
not a physics
in which
encoding
and decoding
can perfectly
make sense
okay
I've got
two remarks
I suppose
I mean
I
well
let me
remember
one of
the idea
that the
brain is
an analog
computer
and neuron
spike trains
are an
analog
representation
of reality
I don't
think that
to me
spike trains
are
irretrievably
encoded
and we
don't know
how they're
encoded
we don't
know
certain neurons
pyramidal neurons
maybe firing rate
is the way
to look at it
but even
looking at firing
rates
is decoding
but nobody
in neurophysiology
looks at
firing rate
in a
computational
sense of the
term
as computational
neuroscientists
do
they just
consider
it's an
analog
signal
that
has an
analog
relationship
with the
amount
of neurotransmitters
that are
going to be
released
and how
that's
going to
affect
based on
the
biochemistry
of the
synaptic
cleft
the potential
of membrane
on other
neurons
so for them
it's really
like an
electronic
machine
of a
classical
analog
you know
there is
no analog
digital
converter
if you
wish
in the
sense
of
analog
signal
for them
it's
all
analog
I suppose
the other
problem
I have
with that
is you
can look
at certain
neurons
in the
brain
and it
appears
that they
encode
things
or they
represent
things
by firing
rate
you could
say
that is
analog
but actually
how do you
know
models

I'm sorry
to cut
you
Robert
the
enthusiasm
of the
discussion
but those
are models
that have
been
extracted
and designed
by people
who started
thinking
computationally
about the
brain
and who
had a
fairly
superficial
culture
about neurons
and
electrophysiology
I would say
for many
of them
and that
decided to
interpret
spike
trains
and their
frequency
or the
rate of
spiking
as a
signal
that in
itself
was the
meaningful
signals
in their
simplified
model
of
neurophysiology
to be
able to
compute
certain
functions
like
doing
arithmetics
or
understand
certain
basic
memory
mechanism
and input
output
relationships
through
transfer
function
but that's
a small
very small
part of
neuroscience
that's
the
computational
neuroscientists
that were
trying to
do
modeling
and that
interpreted
spike
train
as a
relevant
parameter
but a
true
neurophysiologist
would never
think that
way
do you mean
experimental
neurophysiologist
or even
theoretical
I mean
an
electrophysiologist
who masters
the biophysics
of
membranes
of active
conduction
oh sure
that's a
physical
theory
that way
they think
that
yeah
I'm talking
about people
who worry
about consciousness
yeah but
they are not
they are usually
not real brain
scientists
that's what
I'm saying
yeah
okay
Kenneth
and then
Paul or
anyone else
who hasn't
spoken
Ben
unmute
Kenneth
sorry
just to
make a
quick remark
with
relation
to what
David
just said
I mean
I think
McCulloch
and
Pitts
knew their
neurophysiology
pretty well
and they
knew they
were making
a massive
simplification
and
making
a choice
and kind
of setting
up neural
network
modeling
you know
as computational
but
I just
want to
say
and it's
also kind
of following
up with
what
David
says
well I
have two
questions
really
so one
is
suppose there
is this
analog
model
I mean
can't we
raise the
same sort
of objections
to computational
models
that we
I mean
couldn't we
raise to
analog models
the same
sort of
objections
we're raising
to computational
models
models
so for
example
if you
take
analog
computers
like
the
differential
engine
you know
Charles Babbage's
wasn't it
called the
differential
engine
that
yeah
you know
that was
Latin Babbage
well
he did
the differential
engine
and there
was a
laser one
in the
30s
okay
so it's
it's using
gears
if I'm
not mistaken
to do
yeah
sure
you mentioned
the abacus
I mean
it's an
analog
device
and someone
might kind
of push
and go
well
really
digital
computers
are all
implemented
in an
analog
world
so really
they're
analog
I know
there's like
the flip
side
where everybody's
trying to
turn everything
and everything
analog into
something digital
like you know
information
ontologies
or it
it from
bit
kind of
so there's
this kind
of
to me
the key
distinguishing
factor is
that some
of the
information
in an
analog
model
doesn't
need
decoding
okay
and I
can
I can
I can
I like
that idea
because I
think that
there's
and that
leads me
to my
second
question
I like
the idea
because
I'm one
of those
who thinks
that
consciousness
is not
exhausted
by intentionality
and what I
mean by that
is
yes there's
the intentional
level where
you think
like you're
seeing something
as
something
but there's
also the
level at
which you're
just seeing
if we're
talking about
for example
so for
example
if you
you might
wake up
in the
morning
and have
like a
wadded
sheet
in front
of your
face
and for
a second
you don't
know what
it is
but there's
still
before you
interpret
it
right
so there's
still something
you're
sort of
directly
aware
of
that
doesn't
require
any
decoding
to be
aware
of it
and then
there's
this
further
layer
of decoding
which is
like oh
it's a
sheet
or oh
it's kind
of perceptual
and that's
where
intentionality
or meaning
in the sense
we've been
talking about
it
enters in
now
okay so
I like
that idea
that an
analog model
might give
you that
layer
that isn't
it's
information
that doesn't
have to be
decoded
because it's
really sort
of just
built into
the structure
of that
episode
or that
phase of
consciousness
itself
but
my question
for you
really is
what is it
to decode
or interpret
or intentionally
animate
to use a
Husserlian
language
like what
is it
to see
something
as
something
that's
like a
further
process
you can
imagine
in theory
anyway
a kind
of consciousness
that doesn't
do it
that is
basically
just
kind of
locked
in this
you know
it doesn't
really sort
of get
outside
of itself
yeah
your arguments
earlier on
kind of
depend on
consciousness
always involving
intentionality
or interpretation
which
you know
I certainly
a tempting
thought
that it
always does
I can't
say that
it's
false
but I
wonder
like
what
is
the
theory
of
interpretation
or the
theory
of
intentionality
and do
you need
one
for your
project
well
this
I would
say
in that
moment
you
wake up
before
you've
interpreted
your
sense
data
as
this
is
a
sheet
there
are
things
in
your
sense
data
like
a
boundary
between
red
and
green
yeah
you know
and
you're
aware
of
that
boundary
before
you
say
oh
that's
about
my
sheet
yeah
and so
there
is
a
pre
interpretation
experience
raw
experience
and that
quality
of the
what it
is like
bit
is
what
where the
analog
model
represents
it
has
a
nice
fit
to
consciousness
analog
model
has got
a
barrier
between
red
and
green
your
consciousness
has
that
and
that's
for
classification
and
intentionality
when you
see
something
on the
wall
you
say
oh
that's
a
fly
that
as
built
in
by
evolution
animals
have
to
take
their
sense
data
and
classify
it
into
things
they
need
to
do
things
about
as
a
fly
I
can
eat
it
whatever
and
that
secondary
experience
of
taking
a piece
of
sense
data
and
classifying
it
as
something
is
useful
for
the
animal
but
it
also
involves
the
conscious
bit
that
once
the
animal
has
seen
a fly
as
a
fly
doesn't
quite
see
the
raw
sense
data
it
mixes
the
fly
up
with
previous
flies
it
seen
in
his
memory
and
its
current
model
of
reality
involves
not only
the
sense
data
coming
in
but
all
the
flies
it
seen
before
that
they're
going
to
behave
that
way
and
be
edible
or
whatever
it
may
be
I
can
agree
with
that
but
what
I
wonder
is
is
that
the
seeing
as
or
the
interpretation
you want
to deny
that
that
could
be
computational
correct
no
no
it's
computational
but it
feeds results
back into
the model
so you
think
that
when I
see a
fly on
the wall
there's
computation
in my
brain
that says
that's
a fly
but then
that
computation
feeds back
into my
analog
model
so my
analog
model
is a
bit more
fly-like
than it
was
before
but now
you've
got
intentionality
in your
computations
and then
we can
go back
and go
well
why were
you
objecting
to
computations
being
intentional
in the
first half
of your
talk
no
my
computation
has
evolved
to
classify
the
visual
field
into
useful
things
that I
need
to
know
about
and
you
know
the
computation
doesn't
know
that's
a
fly
the
computation
just
does
some
grinding
and
it
makes
my
muscles
do
a
fly
thing
and it
makes
my
conscious
awareness
do
a
fly
thing
but
inside
it
the
computation
is not
aware
of a
fly
oh
okay
I
all right
I'll have to
think about it
I'm not
I'm not sure
I follow you
completely
but
well
my
brain's
evolved
to
classify
things
usefully
to help
me
survive
I
agree
with
that
yeah
and
that
evolution
hasn't
made it
aware
of what
things
are
it's
just
for
certain
inputs
it
produces
good
outputs
which
make
me
avoid
flies
okay
but
also
produces
outputs
into
the
analog
model
that
says
when I
see
a
blur
on
the
wall
and
I'm
not
sure
what
it
is
I
suddenly
interpret
that
blur
becomes
a bit
more
focused
as a
fly
because
I
know
there
are
flies
on
that
wall
okay
so
the
interpretation
is a
consciousness
is a
conscious
matter
yeah
no
the
interpretation
happens
in the
computer
bit
but
the
result
of
being
more
fly
like
than
a
blur
on
the
wall
is
in
the
conscious
bit
then
it
seems
to
me
you're
using
interpretation
or decoding
in
one sense
in the
first half
your talk
and in
another
sense
right now
I don't
understand
I'm
saying
the decoding
happens
on
in
the brain
has
encode
the computer
brain
has encoded
stuff in
it
and there's
two kinds
of decoding
there's decoding
going out
the muscles
and there's
decoding
going into
the
analog
model
at some
point
if you
wish
Ken
for what
I
understand
there is
a decoding
that comes
from the
processing
of the
within
the
brain
that
involved
initially
a form
of
encoding
that
remaps
somehow
this
code
into
an
analog
model
that
maps
the
outside
world
in
a
manner
that
is
coherent
in
terms
of
shape
if
you
wish
so
there's
a
shape
outside
the
world
you
don't
see
it
directly
you
encode
it
through
neural
process
and
somewhere
somehow
through
some
mechanisms
to be
defined
it's
decoded
within
to
generate
and
synthesize
an
analog
experience
of the
world
for which
even though
there is
an
indirect
process
there is
a
one-to-one
of
sort
mapping
or
some
mapping
that
is
more
analogous
in
the
sense
of
continuous
deformation
if
I
understand
it
yeah
but
this
is
the same
kind
of
decoding
that
can
happen
when you
ask
chat
GPT
a question
and it
spits out
an answer
right
no it
just does
electronics
what's that
chat GPT
just does
electronics
nothing else
yeah I got you
but we're talking
about the
you want to
say there is
still a
computational
sense of
encoding
and decoding
yes
but earlier
in the talk
it was
about
there's
really
no
computation
without
some
external
observer
sort
of
attributing
or
interpreting
a
computation
right
I'm totally
fine
with your
model
and that's
the role
of the
analog
model
if I
understand
well
yeah
yeah
yeah
so there's
a kind
of
there's
sensory
inputs
they get
encoded
and then
there's a
decoding
step
from the
sensory
inputs
to the
analog
model
and when
that's right
and the
analog
model
is like
the
conscious
episode
and it's
what we
might call
the
conscious
interpretation
that's
right
yeah
I
go back
to this
diagram
if
if you
like
I've
just
come back
to
um
is that
diagram
showing
yeah
but earlier
you said
decoding
was going
to be
the same
as
interpretation
and so
what I'm
getting at
is like
the d
like
for your
your
your
your
your
outer
d
to
muscles
is that
really
interpretation
no but
again
I think
from the
they are
decoding
spike trains
they are
interpreting
spike trains
as physical
movements
yeah
from the
outset
Robert
said
if you
only take
the
computer
model
which
in the
digital
world
excludes
an
analog
model
in this
rationale
then you
cannot get
an
interpreter
that is
inside
the
brain
it's
always
some
human
or
some
other
type
of
interpreter
outside
now
what
is
introducing
is
a
new
mechanism
that
is
still
to
be
uncovered
in
terms
of
its
physics
or
its
whatever
in
which
an
analog
model
is
actually
working
within
the
brain
and
therefore
is
not
digitally
operating
as
in
a
computer
so
there
is
a
mixed
architecture
between
a
digital
and
analog
system
in
the
brain
so to
speak
yes
but
but
just
it
just
it
seems
to
me
like
your
D
in
the
red
box
that
process
is not
it's
the
coding
process
is not
itself
an
intentional
interpretation
but it
results
in
one
yeah
it
results
in
one
yeah
it's
creating
the
analog
model
okay
Benjamin
and then
Paul
and then
anyone
else
who
wants
to
add
more
unmute
Benjamin
Benjamin
unmute
apologies
if I
understand
correctly
and I'm
sure you
can clarify
this for
me
there are
according to
this
projective
way
theory
of
consciousness
there are
certain
things
that
are
built
in
or
baked
into
the
system
such
as
time
pressure
or
time
perception
and
are
there
other
things
besides
time
and
space
that
would be
necessary
for
consciousness
to emerge
or
is it
just
that
with
the
effects
of
entropy
I
would
put
the
emphasis
on
space
the
analog
model
is a
model
of
space
in the
present
moment
and I
think
for most
animals
the
present
moment
is all
that
exists
they don't
have a sense
of
chronological
time
and they don't
worry about
time
they're just
worrying about
what they're
going to do
right now
and so
that's
for that
they need
analog
model
of
space
so
I
would
put
much
more
emphasis
on
space
than
time
I
think
chronological
time
is a
recent
human
thing
it
came
along
with
language
great
thank you
Brianna
then Paul
or anyone
else
hi
so
what if
I look at
something
and I
can't
quite
comprehend
it
would
that
mean
I'm
not
conscious
of
I'm
not
currently
conscious
what if
an
animal
can't
comprehend
something
or
anything
for that
matter
sorry
I
didn't
catch
all the
questions
try
again
so
the
ability
to
extract
meaning
in
an
analog
model
is
what
you
would
say
is
required
for
consciousness
done
yeah
so
what if
I'm
unable
to
extract
meaning
about
something
am I
not
conscious
in that
moment
no
I think
you're asking
about animals
I think
we've got
a perfectly
good theory
of animals
how animal
brains
absorb
sense data
and classify
sense data
into situations
they need to do
things about
and do things
about those
situations
that theory
doesn't tell
us how
animal
brains
are
conscious
and
that's
so
I would
decouple
the two
issues
of
you know
how a
brain
does
its
practical
job
of helping
the animal
or the
person
survive
versus
how a
brain
actually
creates
consciousness
now we
don't
actually
know
whether
animals
are
conscious
but
I
would
guess
that
they
are
so
if
they're
unable
to make
the
classification
of for
example
the
sheep
from the
early
analogy
then they
would
not
be
conscious
well
I
think
the
two
questions
are
independent
the
animal
brain
can
make
the
classification
that
it
has
to
but
it
can
do
that
without
being
conscious
of
it
perhaps
Brianna
you can
think
of an
example
that
comes
from
neuropsychology
think
about
a
person
who
gets
dementia
or
some
other
very
debilitating
neurological
disease
and for
whom
at some
point
everything
is a
confused
world
which
is
very
difficult
to
interpret
very
disorienting
very
minimalistic
in
terms
of
the
content
of
the
quantity
of
information
that
a
person
can
integrate
but
nevertheless
the
person
still
is
trapped
into
this
confused
and
disorienting
experience
so there
might be
consciousness
but not
necessarily
very
informative
in the
sense
of
adaptive
coupling
with
the
world
so to
speak
would
you
agree
with that
Robert
I
agree
that
if you
take
this
viewpoint
you
can
bounce
it
off
all
sorts
of
situations
like
that
the
person
who's
terminally
confused
and so
on
and I
think
you
keep
getting
insights
as to
how
the
picture
works
in
those
cases
and
it
takes
to
me
quite
a lot
of
sort
of
reflecting
about
what
this
model
of
the
brain
actually
means
and
how
it
affects
how
we
interpret
various
strange
conditions
like
that
yeah
I
agree
it's
instructive
to do
but
I
don't
have
all
the
answers
to
what
comes
out
of
asking
those
questions
so
the
patient
with
dementia
would
be
less
conscious
than
someone
with
that
is
what
we
would
do
!
not
!
No
a
person
with
dementia
might
still
be
very
conscious
of
the
room
around
them
but
in
an
instantaneous
way
rather
than
like
an
animal
has
no
sense
of
the
future
or
the
past
or
causality
or
whatever
it
could
be
just
conscious
of
sensations
in
the
present
moment
yeah
and
for
me
you
know
what
you
say
is
somewhat
what
would
the
integrated
information
theory
would
claim
that
you
need
to
have
some
sort
of
complexity
and
efficiently
integrated
information
that
is
both
rich
and
synthetic
to
get
a
high
quantity
of
consciousness
but
to me
the
core
of
consciousness
is
not
that
and
I
worked
a lot
with
patients
a long
time
ago
in
neuropsychology
and
I
think
you
can
be
acutely
conscious
while
being
totally
confused
it
can
be
a
very
intense
conscious
experience
to be
totally
confused
it's
not
informative
in the
sense
of
adaptive
coupling
but
that's
so
then
meaning
is
not
required
for
consciousness
or
maybe
a bit
of
meaning
but
at
least
some
and
again
that
begs
the
question
of
what
we
call
meaning
it's a
complicated
question
but at least
the structured
adaptive
highly informative
content of
consciousness
when the
wine is
super
efficient
and
well coupled
with its
environment
might not
be what
really
is the
most fundamental
aspect of
consciousness
it often
goes with
it
it's
very useful
to have
it
but
I remember
patient
is a
very
amnesic
patient
with
enterograd
amnesia
that were
very
bad
or
dementia
patient
that
really
were
confused
but
were
living
very
intense
and
distressing
experience
and
I would
say
that
even
though
they
could
not
necessarily
have
a
very
profound
recursive
thinking
about
their
own
consciousness
and
how
it
is
perceived
by
others
etc
even
though
they
would
have
a
hard
time
to
navigate
even
their
immediate
environment
their
experience
was
intense
I
definitely
agree
with
your
interpretation
fascinating
I
think
that's
all
I
have
to
say
hi
Paul
hi
Robert
I
thought
you'd
be
disappointed
if I
didn't
say
something
so
there
we
go
I'm
also
a little
disappointed
you didn't
credit me
with the
Roomba
example
didn't
I
didn't
what
didn't
credit
me
with
the
Roomba
I
didn't
get
in
that
the
rumor
example
is
dear
Paul
first
of
just
to
say
that
I
am
a
lay
person
in
all
of
the
aspects
of
this
discussion
except
for
the
fact
I
am
a
professional
human
being
and
Robert
and I
often
engage
in
philosophical
and
computational
discussions
around
the
area
this
area
and
not
being a
lay
person
I
can
pose
some
questions
but
I
may
not
understand
your
answer
so
I
am
going
to
say
that
right
the
answer
no
may
I
but
Robert's
requirement
for
encoding
and decoding
relies on
the requirement
for an
extra layer
of
significance
and meaning
to use the
word that
he has
given
it
and
my
understanding
is that
those
requirements
for extra
significance
and meaning
come from
the fact
that we
know
we are
conscious
that
we have
consciousness
so
Robert and
I
in one
of our
discussions
came to
be an
impasse
where
he said
well
I know
I can
take the
rimbar apart
and I can
see how
it works
and it's
clearly just a matter
of physics
and electronics
and so we
have that
evidence
and then we
have the
evidence
that we
are conscious
then he
said
at least
I'm
conscious
do you
not know
that you
are
Paul
and
I
don't
know
I don't
know I'm
conscious
in the
sense
that
there is
a clear
category
difference
between
what I
experience
what I
feel
if you
like
and what
I can
imagine
an
advanced
AI
self-evolving
computer
with
sensors
actuators
etc
to have
I cannot
hand on
heart
say that
I know
where that
dividing line
comes
so I
would just
like to
posit
that there
is no
meaning
beyond
what our
brains
our neural
brains
what their
currency
is
what the
conclusion
of our
neural
brains
is
there is
no
meaning
beyond
that
because
both
the
advanced
Roomba
whatever
or
ourselves
we
attach
adequate
meaning
to
what we
perceive
to
inhabit
the
environment
we're
in
so I
would
question
why there
is a
divide
that requires
encoding and
decoding to
happen
I think
in a nutshell
that's
the essence
of the
argument
which I've
rehearsed with
Robert
before
yeah
let me
try and
approach
that
I mean
I'm
concerned
with doing
science
in order
to do
science
I need
experimental
data
and if
I'm going
to do
science
about
consciousness
I need
experimental
data about
consciousness
and I have
got data
I claim
that tells
me I am
conscious
but I
haven't got
data that
tells me
the
rumba
is
conscious
so
the
question
whether
or not
a rumba
is
conscious
I don't
feel
it's
justified
to assume
it is
conscious
in any
sense
anything
it's
like
to be
a
rumba
I just
don't
see
that's
a
problem
for
my
science
if
it's
solely
trying
to
account
for
consciousness
of
things
with
brains
biological
things
so
in a
sense
the
question
whether
the
rumba
is
conscious
or
not
is
of
less
interest
to
me
just
because
I
don't
have
data
about
it
because
I
think
I
do
have
data
about
me
that's
not
the
challenge
I'm
putting
to
you
Robert
the
challenge
I'm
putting
to you
in essence
is
whether
there
is
a
distinction
between
the
sensory
experience
ability
to
operate
in
its
environment
that
are
and
beyond
advanced
AI
self-evolving
possibly
self-replicating
with improvements
robot
between that
and what
we are
so
again
I'm challenging
the notion
that
humans
have some
categorical
distinction
self-awareness
awareness of
our environment
which
we
call
consciousness
which I
have a
real problem
with that
word
which is
different
to that
of an
advanced
piece of
electronics
and
computing
so
it's
it's
I'm not
challenging
you to
say
whether
a
room
bar
is
conscious
or
not
I'm
challenging
you to
identify
a
distinction
between
the
two
because
if
there
is
no
distinction
between
the
two
the
only
distinction
is
I've
got
data
about
me
I
don't
have
data
as a
room
bar
and
I'm
doing
science
so
I
need
data
but
you
the
data
you've
ascribed
to
yourself
is
consciousness
that
is
distinct
from
machines
so
I
have
data
that
says
there
is
something
that
is
like
to
be
me
this
is
the
Thomas
Nagel
sense
of
consciousness
that
is
what
it
is
like
and
internally
in my
brain
in
in
my
life
there
is
something
that
is
like
to
be
alive
I
don't
have
that
evidence
about
a
room
bar
so
a
room
doesn't
worry
me
because
I'm
trying
to do
science
not
just
philosophy
I'm
using
philosophy
for
science
if
you
like
and
for
my
scientific
purposes
I
need
data
and
the
only
data
on
consciousness
that
I've
got
is
data
on
consciousness
in
people
so
I'm
deliberately
restricting
my
focus
if
you
like
just
to
do
this
and
not
that
but
what
you're
saying
is
that
your
consciousness
is
putting
a degree
of
significance
on
the
objects
which
your
eyes
light on
which
is
greater
than
that
simply
required
to
operate
in
your
environment
I
don't
see
yeah
I
mean
it's
a
remarkable
fact
I
could
be
a
zombie
but
I'm
not
right
well
that's
what
I'm
shouting
in
the
politest
possible
way
yeah
I
mean
it's
a
philosophical
possibility
that
I
am
a
zombie
but
I
haven't
had
first
person
experience
which
says
I'm
not
a
zombie
whereas
a
rumba
could
well
be
a
zombie
and
I
think
it
actually
is
a
zombie
it
doesn't
bother
me
I
just
restrict
my
viewpoint
to
where
I've
got
data
I'm
not
sure
that's
what
Paul
is
talking
about
but
I'm
saying
my
viewpoint
is
restricted
I'm
only
trying
to
do
science
I'm
not
trying
to
evaluate
philosophical
possibilities
I'm
only
trying
to
produce
a
scientific
account
of
consciousness
and
the
only
consciousness
I
know
about
is
what
happens
in
biological
things
such
as
me
yeah
and
I'm
not
making
a
philosophical
point
I'm
simply
saying
that
your
requirement
for
encoding
and
decoding
is
only
there
because
you
think
that
there
is
something
there
is
something
some
attachment
of
meaning
and
significance
required
to
those
things
over
and
above
what
is
simply
required
to
operate
in
an
environment
like
a
room
bar
and
I
don't
see
that
I
don't
see
that
yeah
I
mean
part of
the confusion
in these
debates
is that
we're stuck
with language
and language
is encoded
and it's encoded
very badly
and ambiguously
and we use words
with very
different meanings
and so
we can
construct
all these
constructs
about
consciousness
which go
way beyond
the thing
itself
and which
get us
down
blind
alleys
I think
I think
you know
I have
a problem
with the
term
consciousness
and it's
it's
it's
it's
it's
one of
those words
that we're
very bad
I mean
we imagine
when we use
words
we imagine
they're kind
of precise
and say
what we mean
but they
are so
imprecise
it does
surprise me
that the
scientific
community
would continue
to use
a word
like
consciousness
rather than
breaking
it down
to its
consistent
parts
and banning
the use
of the
word
consciousness
it does
not feel
helpful
that's
been
true
well
I think
Brianna
had a
had a
follow-up
isn't that
right
to Paul's
you are
right
okay
go ahead
so building
on Paul's
point
I'm actually
curious
whether
an AI
model's
need to
navigate
its
environment
through
interacting
with us
and processing
tokens
might lead
to its
own
development
of a
subjective
experience
could it
be that
such
operational
requirements
foster an
emergent
intelligence
that we
simply
can't
grasp
because
we
don't
share
the
same
kind
of
subjectivity
in other
words
if these
models
engage
with the
world
in ways
that
parallel
our
interactions
what
exactly
distinguishes
their
processes
from what
we
recognize
as
human
consciousness
and
does
this
experience
involve
extracted
meaning
I don't
think I
have a
neat
answer
to
that
really
I just
come back
to my
view
that
anything
that
goes
on
inside
an
AI
computer
whether
it's
running
a
robot
or
anything
else
is
not
about
things
and
I
have
consciousness
which
seems
to me
to be
about
things
for
you
you
can't
verify
that I'm
conscious
or
that
nothing
else
is
conscious
so
why
can't
we
verify
that
a
machine
is
also
conscious
can
they
extract
meaning
like
we
do
from
their
own
subjective
experience
and
does
that
fit
into
your
model
if
they
are
conscious
the
consciousness
they have
is not
the
subject
I'm
studying
does
that
help
at all
no
probably
not
that
does
help
actually
it's a
fascinating
conversation
yep
how about
each
person
can
give
sort
of
a
final
round
where
does
this
take
Benjamin
and
then
continue
around
hello
yeah
so
I
can
answer
questions
about
like
artificial
intelligence
and
consciousness
no
I don't
think
artificial
intelligence
can
be
conscious
at least
not
distributed
systems
specifically
the
needing
diversity
complexity
these
kind of
things
would
prevent
that
from
occurring
in
any
real
measurable
way
like
in terms
of
subconscious
or
something
of that
nature
the
like
a
thousand
of a
thing
is
not
diversity
it's
not
complexity
it's
just
one
thing
so
in
that
regard
I
don't
think
it's
possible
in
any
way
for
artificial
intelligence
to
achieve
sentient
self-awareness

consciousness
but
it
definitely
looks like
it
and
I think
that's
pretty
cool
certainly
so
if
it
walks
like
a
duck
and
it
talks
like
a
duck
it's
probably
a
duck
yeah
exactly
David and
Kenneth
well
I'm going to be a bit mischievous
I agree with everybody
and I don't know
at this point
so
everything is open to me
almost
not everything
but
I don't know
yeah
I think that is the last word
actually
Ken
well
I mean
I think it's perfectly
conceivable
that you could
have
an AI
that
passes
every kind of
souped up
Turing test
you want
they become
our best friends
or whatever
and they're
complete zombies
I think that's
perfectly possible
at least
it's conceivable
on
the other hand
I took your argument
Robert
to be something like
look
if all you've got
is computation
so if an AI
no matter how
fancy it is
no matter how
behaviorally
equivalent
it is
to a
conscious being
if all it's got
is computation
going on
it's not
conscious
because we know
that these
computations
do not carry
any meaning
they're not
carrying
intentionality
and consciousness
at least
has the capacity
for intentionality
and meaning
that whole
argument
as I said
earlier on
is going to
depend on
just like
do you think
there is
a reasonable
theory of
intentionality
that could
be applied
to computational
systems
or natural
systems
and that
of course
is an
old
debate
as I said
earlier
that goes
back to
even before
Searle and
Dennett
but Searle and
Dennett
and then people
arguing about
intentionality
and representation
after that
and then
kind of
you're right
that Chalmers
kind of
resuscitates
it but
it's also
like
it's a kind
of a debate
that
went somewhat
silent
I think
because
everybody
realized
they have
no idea
what to
say
and
at the end
of the day
but I think
it's good
that you're
bringing it
back up
and that
you're making
us think
about this
in light
of a new
idea
now that
idea
itself
I want to
ask you
one sort
of last
detail
oh let me
just say
in favor
of the word
keeping the word
consciousness
consciousness
no
it's been
tried
before
to
ban the word
consciousness
from the
philosophy of
mind
this was
a very
formidable
attempt
by none
other than
the nefarious
Martin Heidegger
with the word
Dasein
and then of
course you
just end up
replicating
you know
creating more
ambiguity
and you
you know
so I think
we got to
pick some
word
right
consciousness
is fraud
it has an
interesting
history
but we got
to pick
some word
for it
but okay
let me put
that aside
the thing
about your
model
is this
when you
say that
this
analog
model
of space
has to
be
topologically
equivalent
to
space
ambient
space
is that
right
and
physical
reality
yeah
if you've got a
tension
your model
has a
tension
and there's
a
continuous
function
right
the
function
must be
continuous
does that
mean that
the analog
model of
space
is itself
really just
a space
it is in
fact
itself
a kind
of space
and is it
continuous
and is it
going to
require that
the physical
realization
of it
involves
continuity
well
in my
particular
theory
the analog
model
is a
Fourier
transform
of a
spatial
distribution
which
and
consciousness
somehow
involves a
Fourier
transform
but that
gets
technical
but
nevertheless
Fourier
transforms
are very
deep in
physics
and quantum
mechanics
so I
think
Fourier
transforms
having to
do with
consciousness
is not
a big
stretch
that's a
way of
evading the
question
yeah
okay
because
you might
think
no
whatever
is going
on here
like
when
our
experience
of
space
it
cannot
be
like
actually
realized
in something
continuous
or it
can't
no
I think
a real
a miniature
space
inside the
brain
is not
going to
happen
cannot
and we
know
enough
about
the
brains
and
there's
not
some
miniature
model
of the
world
inside
the
brain
yeah
but I
think
a Fourier
transform
in a
wave
is the
way that
can happen
okay
all right
thank you
very much
thank you to
the live
chatters also
for their
vigorous
commentary
so thank
you all
till next
time
all right
bye many
thanks
thank you




















Thank you.

## vUO6t1pD0Hg

Hello, welcome everyone. It is October
15th, 2025 and we are in active guest
stream number 82.6 continuing with the
Robert Warden series. Today, Robert will
be presenting and we will discuss a
unified theory of language part one. So
if you're watching live, please write
any questions in the live chat and we'll
address it after this presentation. So
thank you Robert for joining to you.
Okay. Uh can you hear me?
Yep.
Okay. Well, this is Robert Wen here
talking about a unified theory of
language. Um
this is a summation of what I've been
doing in language for several years now
and it's in a paper on archive which you
can go to and it's quite a long paper.
It's about 50 pages actually. So this
talk is in two parts
and uh I'll introduce what is coming in
each part in in a minute
right now.
So the talk is really about all of
language and language is traditionally
uh looked at in terms of these different
areas. There's phenology is how sounds
fit together to make words. There is
syntax there is how the words fit
together to make utter utterances
uh statements and questions and so on.
There is semantics how utterances
express meanings.
There is pragmatics and that is how we
carry on conversations with each other.
How we understand what each other is
going on in conversation
and those are the four traditional
areas. Then of course there is learning.
How do we learn to do all of this stuff?
And finally there's evolution. How did
language evolve and why did it evolve?
And the two columns at the right speaker
and listener column are empty but they
are there to remind us that in every
question in language there are two sides
to the question. There's a speaker side
how the speakers do it and there's a
listener side how to listen understand
what's going on. And finally, um the
evolution row at the bottom. Um I
believe this uh phrase, I don't know who
said it, that nothing in biology makes
sense except in the life of evolution
and certainly language. There's a lot to
say about language evolution. And I
shall be saying that in in two parts in
both these talks.
So
here's what I'm going to cover roughly
in the first of the live streams.
language
um I shall say is works by hierarchical
basian pattern matching in other words
by minimizing free energy so it's it's a
a ripe area for the fe to be applied
it's quite a complicated area because
it's not just pattern matching many
thousands of different patterns are
involved there's we have one pattern for
every word in our native language
and the state-of-the-art now is there
are working models of phology ology,
syntax and semantics. The situation in
pragmatics is not so clear. Um anyway,
these working models have been developed
in what cognitive linguistics
and I shall be taking an approach that
uses cognitive linguistics, not chskin
linguistics.
And in cognitive linguistics, every word
is represented by what's called a
construction. And a construction is a a
graph, a feature structure pattern.
And what we do when we speak language or
hear it is we do basian pattern
matching. And the particular word in con
cognitive linguistics for that pattern
matching is unification. And that's been
developed for a long time now for a good
40 years that idea has been in
development.
And we learn language by a different
operation on feature structures which is
called intersection. And that's a kind
of complement to unification which I
will talk about.
So all of that is a model of language
which works at David Mars level one of
requirement and level two of abstract
algorithms and data structures. It's not
a neural implementation
and I regard the neural implementation
of language as a problem yet to be
solved.
So that's what I'm going to talk about
in the first live stream and pragmatics
I leave entirely to the second. Now just
a brief summary of the second live
stream of some kind of foretaste.
It's all about evolution. Language
started in conversation. That was the
earliest evolution of language. Simple
conversations.
And language evolved by sexual
selection, not just natural selection.
And that sexual selection to do a
particular thing to show off our
intelligence. And that's why we are so
intelligent actually. And because of
this language is not the neutral system
that people think of. It's rather biased
and it's about social status.
And in any conversation we use
special patterns for mind reading for
knowing what the other person thinking.
So that's theory of mind. And then I
will be mainly talking about pragmatics.
Pragmatics I shall say uses the same
kind of basin pattern matching as we saw
in this live stream for syntax and
semantics.
This model of pragmat pragmatics
addresses both the speaker side and the
listener side of the problem that is
new. So we learn these mind readading
patterns and in those patterns we have a
thing called a shadow audience which is
our imagination of the other person who
assesses our own status and that idea of
shadow audience is the whole basis of
the human sense of self.
Now the human sense of self is obviously
very important because it's the basis of
all human society but I shall say it's
the greatest affliction. It is a great
deal of trouble for us as well and I
shall describe why it's trouble and
affliction and I shall finally talk a
little about mindfulness which is a
release from this human self. So that
was a foretaste of the second live
stream but enough of that we'll come
back to the first now and we start with
the first in evolution.
So language evolution is a question with
two parts really. One part one is what
is the underlying cognitive capability?
What's the mechanism in the brain that
does it? And second how did language
actually evolve in particular one
species and no other species. So this
talk first part addresses only part one
of the question and the answer very
simply is that language is hierarchical
basian pattern matching that as you know
is a capability that exists in all
mammals.
So
hierarchical basin pattern matching in
animals is the set is this sort of
hierarchy bottom level we have features
of sense data edges sounds and motion
and so on. Next level up, those features
are integrated into parts of objects,
things like limbs and leaves.
Next level up, the brain
classifies these into whole objects like
food or animals or plants. And finally,
at the very top level, we have the full
generative model of three-dimensional
space around the animal which is the
basis of consciousness.
So that is what the hierarchy looks like
in typical applications of the free
energy principle on animal cognition and
there are many FE models of this and as
you know it's a a joint top down and
bottom up inference process uh getting
the two consistent with each other and
there are FE neural implementations of
that. So a lot of work in the FEP on
that. Now going on to language.
This is how language has a similar
hierarchy. The bottom level hierarchy,
parts of words, syllables if you like.
Next level up, those integrate into
words.
Next level up, those words are
integrated into utterances. And finally,
individual utterances are pulled
together in conversations.
So that's the hierarchy for language and
joining the levels of the hierarchy of
the different topics in language.
Phenology puts phone names together and
make words. Syntax and semantics put
words together to make utterances. And
finally, pragmatics is how utterances
are put together to make conversations.
Now,
as I say, I think this is a very fertile
area for the FE.
Are there any FE models of this? Now, as
far as I know, there aren't because most
of the work on the in the FE on language
has been in the Chskin tradition rather
than in a cogen linguistics tradition,
which is much more akin to this
hierarchical pattern matching idea.
It's quite hard to do. There are lots of
patterns to be matched, but basically
this is an FE application and I don't
think it's been done yet in cognitive
linguistics.
There have been FE papers on chumpskin
linguistics but um
those are different. Now there is a
longunning dispute or feud between
chskin linguistics and so-called
cognitive linguistics. Now cognitive
linguistics on the left has been
developed since about 1975 or 80 by a
large number of people. Gerald Gazdar,
Kaplan, Ronald Langaka
and many others. And it uses
unificationbased grammarss. It makes
computational models. It has
constructions which are called fe which
are feature structures.
And each construction has two poles
which I shall go through all of this in
in some detail and that is cognitive
linguistics. On the other side there is
generative jammer grammar and there is
been a long running dispute really
between workers in cogn linguistics and
followers of chsky and generative
grammar. You will recognize many of the
uh memorable slogans of generous
generative grammar. It started a long
time ago with transformation deep
structure.
It has this idea of poverty of the
stimulus that the learning stimulus for
a child is not sufficient to support
learning of language. So because the
stimulus is inadequate there has to be a
lot of innate grammar in the mind. This
is revealed by language universals and
there is a syntax module in the brain
which has autonomy which is a module on
its own has nothing to do with other
parts of the brain.
And you know there's a chkin distinction
of language competence versus language
performance. And the story of language
evolution is quite a strange one. The
chskin story is that there was a kind of
miracle mutation that language arrived
on one individual called Prometheus uh
in one generation about 200,000 years
ago by a miracle mutation, a hugely
unlikely mutation. So that if you like
is chosen linguistics in a in a in a
nutshell. There are there's been loads
of ideas throughout the years. Now I
believe that constant linguistics has
been much more successful
than chomskin linguistics for two
reasons. It's built much more working
computational models
and they really do work for many
different languages. and is confronted
much more empirical data about language
whereas chsy and linguistics they
haven't built very computing very many
working models and many of the core
hypothesis have been shown to be
incorrect in other words just go through
those in a bit of a detail
transformations deep transformations are
no longer believed in the idea of the
poverty of the stimulus is discredited
there is plenty of stimulus for a child
to learn language. So language
universals turn out not to be universal.
There are always exceptions.
There is no alternative syntax. Syntax
is
irrevocably mixed up with semantics if
you like. There is no actual competence
versus performance distri uh
distinction. Performance was a kind of
convenient way of being able to uh
ignore a lot of the data if you like.
And there is no idea of a miracle
mutation need to account for language.
So um I shall be firmly on the side of
cognitive lingu linguistics and I shall
be advocating that work in the FE should
take that approach to language.
So what is cognitive linguistics? It's
also called construction grammarss and
this has been a successful model of
language since about 1980. And in this
model, every word is represented by
what's called a construction.
And there are larger constructions for
phrases as well as words. But each
construction is at a logical level a
directed asyclic graph, a DAG.
And
the preconstruction has both a fanatic
pole has two poles. a phicic pole which
consists of the sounds at least in the
sounds of a word and a semantic pole
which consists of the meaning of the
word.
So that's what constructions are. You
combine these constructions in a
sentence by unifying them. So
unification is the key operation
and that operation handles both speech
production
and speech comprehension. In other
words, it does both sides of the
problem. The speaker's problem and the
listener's problem. And this approach
handles phenology, syntax, and
semantics. So, what I'm going to be
talking about in this part of the live
stream is really work that evolved over
the past 40 years, 40 or 50 years.
There's very little that's actually new
here.
Um it's just
so
one of the things I shall refer to is I
have made an online model of how
cognitive linguistics handles
s pragmatic error phenology syntax and
semantics and the model is available
here at baze language.org or so I would
urge you to go and look at that
demonstration to see the things I'm
talking about actually demonstrated in
many different examples and this online
model does production and understanding
of sentences for a number of simple
concrete sentences up to half a dozen
words each. So what this model does it
converts between meanings and words in
both directions. Speakers go from
meanings to words and listeners go from
words to meaning.
And the way it does it is it does one
unification for each word in the
sentence. And you can see the
unification happening.
It has about 100 words in it and you can
use those words to make up your own
sentences and see what it makes of them.
And it's also a model of learning. It
can learn these words from scratch
starting with no language models. So I
should be referring to this model and
using diagrams from it when I talk.
Right?
So here is a construction a typical
construction in construction grammarss.
It's a construction for the word girl
and it's got it's a feature structure.
is a graph as you can see it's pregraph
in this case and it's got various type
nodes and the phonetic pole is just the
sound of the word sound girl and it's
actually broken up into phonemes she g
uh but that's not expanded
and the semantic pole is the meaning of
the word girl and the meaning of the
word girl is a person one person and
it's young and is female so that is a
typical example of a construction in
constructed grammarss.
Nouns are the simplest constructions
because the phonetic pole consists of a
noun consists only of the sounds. It's
pure phonetics.
Now if we go to the next more complex
thing for a verb like drinks here you
find the phonetic pole is more
complicated. The phonetic pole has the
sound drinks in the middle but it also
has two other things. It has a subject,
the person doing the drinking, and an
object, the thing being drunk. And it
needs both those things to make sense.
So the venetic pole in this is more
complicated. And the semantic pole is a
scene in which a person is doing some
drinking of a thing. And these curvy
lines
are links which make the
construction into not a tree a directed
is ascyclic graph. And I've pulled them
apart in order to pull apart the venetic
pole from the semantic pole but in a
sense they share some nodes. And what
these curvy links do is they move
meaning. And when a listener is
listening to a sentence
and they unify the sound drink, the
meaning of the the meaning of the
subject must be there. The meaning of
the agent, the person doing the drinking
has to be there in advance. And it moves
that person
from there down into the final meaning
scene. Similarly, the thing being drunk
has to be there as well. The curved link
moves the meaning down into the drinking
scene. So that is the etic pole and
semantic pole for a more complicated
kind of word construction. In fact, all
word constructions
have this pattern uh with several links
one zero or more links across between
the phonetic pole and the semantic pole.
So how do we speak and understand
language in this model?
Um, this is the most complicated slide
in the in the talk and it illustrates
how we understand a simple sentence, a
two-word sentence. Uh, in this case,
doggy runs.
And the starting point is top middle.
And you can see the the listener
listening to this sentence, doggy runs,
starts off with only the sounds. And
there the the phone names doggy runs are
listed vertically.
And what the listener first does is it
unifies this. The listener has a number
of constructions in her mind and she has
a construction for the word doggy. And
that consists of the phone names doggy
and the meaning uh which is a thing of
type dog. And what the listener does is
to unify this word doggy with the
initial sound. And the result of that
unification is here. What's happened is
that the matching parts, the doggy part
has matched between here and here. So
they've been shaded out because they
match and the meaning of the word doggy
has been imported in here and the
remaining parts of the sentence are
unchanged. So that is a result of the
first unification. And you can see
what's happened. Unification is always a
growing of patterns. It always makes
patterns bigger.
So that's the first step of the
unification. And that result of step one
is pulled down here to the middle of the
bottom. And the next step of unification
is to take the word for runs, the
construction of a run. And this has a
complicated phonetic pole with both the
thing running
the top and then the sound runs and then
a semantic pole here. And now we unify
these two together and we match up on
the sounds runs and runs. So what we get
now is all the sounds have been matched
up and are grayed out. But what we've
produced the bottom here the bottom
meaning scene in which it is a running
act and the thing that doing doing the
running is a dog. So the listener has
understood what the speaker said. Now
that's a unification model of
understanding.
There's a very similar unification model
of language production. And in
production,
you've seen in understanding, you always
match up the sounds. They m match the
phonetic poles and you add the semantic
poles. In production, you go the other
way around. You match up the semantic
poles and you add the sound poles. And
so you start with just a meaning and you
end up with a whole load of sounds that
you can express, you can say.
And so the order of unification has to
be reversed there that you start with
the verbs when you're producing and then
you end up with the nouns. And again,
unification is a way of growing the
structure so that you grow from pure
meaning to a meaning and a sound. And in
this case the curvy links move the
meaning upwards.
Okay. So that is the construction
grammar cognitive linguistics model of
how we speak sentences how we understand
them and as I said you can see them in
the demonstration where I've given you
the link. Um finally
um no I'm switch now. So how does this
relate to the FEP? It relates because
the operation of unification which has
been around in cognitive linguistics for
40 or 50 years that is a basin pattern
match. In other words, it's a
minimization of free energy and I'll
explain briefly why that is.
The construction graph for a word has a
certain information content and the
information I is the sum of the
information in all its nodes and slots.
So you can go around the graph looking
at the information all the nodes and
slots and you add it up and that simply
is the information content but it also
represents some situation in the world
and the probability of that situation is
2 to the minus i. Obviously the more
information the more improbable the
situation is.
Now when you unify two constructions A
and B
that's written C equals AU B. And how do
you form C? To form C you as we've just
seen you match up A and B wherever
possible. Wherever they have the same
slots and values and you're not allowed
to have any conflicts when you match up.
So you keep the matching in the
unification C. keep the matching parts
and you keep both non-matching parts
from A and B and that's why unification
is a growing operation
and the result of this is that C the
result C contains A and it also contains
B
and C is the smallest graph which has
this property.
In other words, of all the graphs which
do this, C has the smallest possible
information content. So it has the
largest possible probability 2 minus i.
So it's the basian maximum likelihood
match of a and b.
Equivalently it's the minimum free
energy matching of a. So unification is
just a free energy minim minimization
process.
Right now the demonstration which I've
told you about also does language
learning. I'll talk briefly about how
that works. There's another operation
you can know on on two constructions and
it's called intersection and you write
the intersection by this funny upside
down U D A U B. Now, how do you form D?
Again, you match up A and B wherever
possible.
Now,
you keep the matching part and you
ignore any non-matching parts. So in
other words any slots in A and B that
are different you just forget those
slots. So the result of that is that A
the structure A contains B and the
structure B contains D
but D is the largest possible feature
structure which has this property which
is contained by both A and B. So D has
the largest possible information content
that's the intersection operation. Um
intersection is essential for learning.
The reason it's essential is that what
intersection does is it projects out the
common parts of two states of affairs
and it throws away the rest. And that's
what you need to do in learning. Uh
language learning is a whole lot of
individual
sentences, situations you hear and you
have to project out what's common
between those in order to learn. And
I'll just briefly describe how that
happens.
Bootstrap learning by intersection.
Suppose a young child has heard learned
some words already A, B, and C, but
hasn't work learned some new word X.
So she hears a sentence which contains
the words A, B, and X.
That means she can do part of the
understanding process unifying and B,
but she can't unify X.
So she does what part of the
understanding process she can do
producing a large feature structure and
she can also observe what's going on.
She can infer the whole meaning from the
conversational context from what an
adult is making a gesture or there's
some food on the table or whatever it
may be. She can guess the meaning on a
reasonable proportion of those
occasions. She gets the guess right. So
she puts the partially understood
sentence together with the guest meaning
to produce what I call a learning
example. And this is denoted by L1.
And she collects a small number of these
learning examples L1, L2, L3. All with
different A's and B's, but all of them
having the same unknown word X in them.
Then in her mind she can do the fixture
unconsciously of course she can do the
intersection operation between these
feature structures L1 intersect L2
intersect L3 and now what turns out and
you can show this mathematically is that
the intersection is just the
construction for the new word. In other
words that intersection is the
construction feature structure for X.
So she learns a new word and and that
way she can bootstrap actually from no
words at all learning nouns first
uh as children do to learning a full
vocabulary and full speaking ability. So
you can see how this works from the
demonstration which here is the URL for
demonstration again. So what this shows
is that the chskin idea of poverty of
the stimulus the idea that there's not
enough information to learn from is just
a myth.
Right, I think I'm getting fairly
close to the end now. Um,
this model of language, the cognitive
linguistics model is a
model at Mars level two. It's a abstract
set of algorithms and data structures.
The abstract data structures are the
feature structures of but it's not a
neural implementation.
It uses hierarchal basin pattern
matching but there is no neural
implementation of it yet as far as I
know. Now I think one could implement
this in the FP and one could start on
neural implement implementation of it
and I think that's a very important
problem to try. I would dearly love to
collaborate with everybody in doing
that. I think there are a number of
challenges in it and here are the
challenges that there are thousands of
word patterns to be matched. Not just a
few buttons, a thousand. So you have to
rapidly selectively retrieve a few
possible match patterns to see which one
match best. You're always looking for
the best fit. So there's some fast
selective retrieval needed. And that if
you get to the unification operation,
it involves a discrete search space as
well, a continuous search space. So
ordinary gradient descent is probably
going to be a rather inefficient way to
do it. I don't know what is the
efficient way to do that unification.
And finally, the graphs that you use
here are dynamic ones. Feature
structures are dynamic tree structures,
graph structures. How do you model those
by static neural networks? Now, I just
don't know the answer to those
questions, but I would very much
appreciate it if anybody wanted to
collaborate on trying to produce an FE
implementation of language in this way.
So, I say I don't think it's been done
yet because I think most of the FE work
on language has been in the Chsian
tradition rather than the cognitive
linguistics tradition.
So that is actually the end of part one
which is took less time than I thought
but so here's a summary of part one of
this um live stream language works by
hierarchical basian pattern matching and
there are many thousands of patterns
and in cognitive linguistics this has
led to working computational models of
phenology syntax and semantics and these
These are in lots of different
languages. It's been done in lots of
different languages.
It covers up to semantic. It doesn't yet
cover pragmatics. That is uh another
subject for the next talk.
So
every word is a construction. It's a a
feature structure graph. It has two
poles, a semantic pole and a phonetic
pole. The key operation is unification.
And unification is basian pattern
matching or equivalently it's the
minimization of free energy.
The same model can do learning by
intersecting feature structures
but this is all at Mars level two. The
neural implementation at Mars level 3 is
a problem still to be solved. I do
invite anybody to collaborate on
tackling that problem.
So that's what I've covered so far and
pragmatics
is the
key gradient which will be addressed in
the next live stream. So I finished
ahead of time and uh
for questions I guess.
>> Thank you Robert. Do you want to share
the baze language.org demo?
Um, yeah, I could I could do that. Um,
>> yeah, that might help
>> clarify.
>> Okay, let me um
go to it.
Take a few minutes. Um,
>> yeah.
>> Yeah. Meanwhile, if anyone Yeah. has
questions, they can write it in the
chat. So I will bring that on screen.
Okay, go for it.
>> Okay, so here's the page you land on if
you go to that and and slide sets and
papers there. But actually to run the
model, you do that and that's what the
model looks like and you got various
menus at the top. There's a help menu
tells you how to get started and so on.
And you can look at constructions for
words and there's a whole load of words.
So you take G
right take the word like him
and there you have the construction with
its um phonetic pole here and as you
hover over nodes you get explanation
what's going on.
Um, so there you can look at words.
Um,
and here you can look at a few sample
sentences. You can make your own
sentences, but I've got a few samples
here. And there's the one doggy runs.
There is all their fragments of
sentences.
Like we have a complicated one here.
Girl who fell.
And that's the meaning.
That's girl who fell is the sound part
of it and the meaning part is a scene in
which a thing which is a girl does an
action which is falling down.
So what you can do with that sentence um
if I can get it is you can try
understanding that sentence.
Let's see what I don't seem to have
enough
uh not sure.
Yeah, I have to manipulate this a bit to
get the buttons to show here. Right, if
I want to understand this sentence,
then we start with the whole sentence.
Girl who fell and you can either expand
or or contract some of these. This is
contracted, right? Girl who fell and
there's the word girl which you unifi
unify first. So you ask it to do a step
and it does a step of unification
and that's the result. So you've removed
or hidden the sound girl and you left
the sound who fell but you replace girl
by a scene in which there's a thing a
young female thing. Then you take the
next step
which is fell.
There's the result of your first step.
And there's the word fell. F E L for L.
And it's a person going on a downward
path. And you ask it to do this step.
And the result of that is you've
eliminated the the fell sound. You just
the only sound you got now left is who.
But here there is the girl and here is
here there is fell.
So you step again
and that is the word for who. It's a
rather complicated one. It's got a
couple of links here. It says
something who something did some action.
Then it it combines the curvy links
combine the actions.
So that's the word who and that is the
result of the second step of
unification.
Um and you ask to do the third step
and you get a final meaning which is a
person who is falling.
So that is quickly how the demonstration
does language understanding.
You can do the same thing for language
generation. And finally, you can run it
through an automatic learning sequence
where it can start with no language, no
words at all, and it builds up knowledge
of first nouns and then the other parts
of speech in language.
Okay.
>> How does it parse those first nouns? Or
is that based on entity recognition?
>> Um, well, let me let me go to that. Um
let's try and do that.
um autolearn. Uh I want to do a word
sometime since I used this actually I'm
we take a noun
apple
there's the construction it has to learn
apple.
Now I think
we're unscripted here so may go wrong.
Um,
I can't
learn that word. That's a that's a pity.
Um,
the learn button doesn't seem to show.
Doesn't seem to be activated at the
moment. So, um,
what I can do is autolearn.
So, it uses a bunch of words. There are
some random learning examples.
And there are nouns.
And there are adjectives and verbs and
and
there are some verbs there and some more
verbs here. And um
I think
when I press this button again.
So what it does is it goes through
random learning examples.
Uh, example one is hot apple.
Example zero is Anna ran. She saw Tim
saw hot apple. My green apple fell. So
what's happening is that it's producing
the meanings for this. The child is
observing the meanings and doing this
intersection operation and the child has
there's a one example is hot apple. My
green apple fell. So the child produces
collects a number of learning examples
including the word apple and does the
intersection operation and each time the
child observes the meaning going on
which is my green apple or apple fell or
whatever it may be and observes the
sound apple. So when the child does the
intersection, it projects out the sound
apple and it projects out the meaning,
the round edible thing. And so the child
learns the word for apple. So I'm sorry
I couldn't demonstrate that in more
detail, but perhaps if you go and
experiment with the demonstration,
you'll find out um how to show more
detail there.
>> Okay. So there's a a juxtaposition
and an associative learning at the phmic
and the conceptual level and those get
unified into what you're calling a
script.
>> Yeah.
>> And the script is always the top node of
a constru of any feature structure.
>> Okay. And the scripts are also
composable
in that trains of phone names can be
recursively parsed for their for their
>> for their ling their lexical elements.
And then that gets parsed in a way that
is
>> not exactly the Chsky and sentence
diagram but more like a cognitive
ontology about the causal relationships
reflected by verbs and other parts of
speech.
Yeah, it it's built on animal cognition
where animals can recognize a scene and
recognize uh what's doing what
and that nonverbal pausing is the way
you build up the meaning part of
sentences.
Uh, if I just have a a slight um,
I saw him
for instance. So that meaning structure,
there's the sound structure and there's
the meaning structure. And the meaning
structure is a sort of pre-existing
animal cognition. Animals can pass
scenes into structures like that.
We've added the sounds.
>> What are the scenes? They they also seem
to be composable. And there's active and
inactive scenes.
>> Yeah, that's right. The the scenes with
just things in them. There are scenes
with action going on. Yeah.
>> So, the lower scene where act is false
is because it's just the fragment him.
Yeah, the lower scene is just describing
him
>> and then the the the composed scene is
saw him
>> which is an action because it has a
>> verb is action of seeing and it's time
in the in the past tense.
I mean th this particular diagram
notation
uh is in some sense not very important
because
they could you could have other ways of
passing
the world into scenes. You could have
carved the world apart in slightly
different ways. The same principles
would hold. You still get fix structures
and you still have unification as a way
of combining them.
So there's one kind of almost
introspective optimization about pattern
matching a new stimulus to previously
recognized stimulus and doing a kind of
detection whether it fits exactly to
what you've seen before or making some
kind of thresholding decision like
whether you're willing to accept a fuzzy
match or going to generate a new
template. But how do you connect that
kind of
knowledge
optimization with the reduction of
uncertainty
about the ecological semantics
like the uncertainty distribution of who
was it that saw him or what is it that
they did with him?
How do you represent those uncertainties
or questions
which the semantics of these diagrams
end up providing information on?
Well, I think the semantics of these
diagrams
is it comes from animal cognition and
animals have an ability to pass a scene
into things and actions and recognize
the importance of those things and
actions. you know, animals sees a
predator or sees something approaching.
It's passed the scene into predator and
and movement and so on and so forth. So
all that is built on animal cognition
and is not new for language. What's new
for language is we pair that in
arbitrary ways with sounds
and we build those bigger feature
structures that have a sound part as
well as a meaning part.
But the whole animal thing is animal
prior and
animal evolution has has made animals
categorize the world into those
categories
and we have a huge number of categories
that we carve the world apart into
before language.
Do you think this helps h how do you
feel that this advances or helps give a
new perspective or direction for
linguistics which already has many
ontologically structured sentence
diagramming approaches
and work at the the morpho syntax
interface
with like how phonemes get associated to
to terminology.
>> Well, I I don't think this is new. In
other words, all the work on
linguistics, people like Jackandov
who've done work on lexical semantics or
many people have worked on it and
there's a whole consensus of of all the
work they've done in cognitive
linguistic linguistics started in the
80s and this is just pulling that
together in a working computational
model.
And I mean I'll tell you the the new
parts of this first live stream are not
the language production and language
understanding that has been being going
on for years in cognitive linguistics.
The new parts are the language learning
part is new and the basian
interpretation linked to the FEP that is
new.
So just summarize again how how would
you connect this or numerically to the
FEP? How do we go from this structural
qualitative map to quantitative
information dynamics?
Um well that goes back to
the slide but if you build an FEV model
of animal cognition
um
which is
visual cognition surveying a scene
classifying things into
features and objects
and the whole of that top- down model
and you link that to language.
The the meaning part is conventional
FEP.
I get back to where
in other words um this this diagram here
is
it there's loads of FE papers about this
and that is the semantics side of
language what's new is is linking it of
the word sound is the word phonetics
and that's been going on in cognitive
linguistics. It it's kind of not new.
It's been going on for so long for since
the 1980s. That's what cognitive
linguistics has been done. It started
before the FE and the two have converged
if you like that they can be seen as
basically doing the same thing in the
domain of language.
Yeah, there's an initial ingress
unification processing from either
visual edge detection in the case of
reading or phonemes in the case of
listening
that move into a a possibly
>> very well behaved
composable cognitive space.
That
is what we tend to see in these
hierarchical generative models
like whether it's the reormalization
group type models or just other other
nested models or coarse grainings
and
>> yeah any multiscale yeah
>> yeah multis and then part of the
challenge is
um
in the situation where nested models
represent
spatial or temporal enclosure,
you're dealing with a divisible
concept of space. So the the clustering
from centimeter to meter is similar to
the nesting of meter to kilometer.
However, so so that that tree only has
like one kind of branch if this were a
nested spatial model. But when we are
>> it also has the branch that the spatial
model comes up to classified things like
insects or animals or vegetables or
whatever. And so it's that
classification in into discrete things
where the contact with language occurs,
>> right? Language presents itself with
many more kinds of edges, not just the
the lumping and splitting of a of a
homogeneous field.
into different units of resolution. But
it actually is the question of where and
how
the specificity and the semantics of
different objects get reflected
either in the biological substrate or in
a computational substrate. So I'm just
looking at, you know, this gray pen.
It's not immediately obvious or there's
multiple implementation strategies
how there could be um just just to kind
of give a um two options. There could be
a color node where the the
value of the color belief is gray.
Or there could be a grayness andor there
could be a greyness node where the
belief quantitatively is like yes.
Yeah. That that's the kind of
representational ambiguity. We don't
know the detail of how colors are
represented in in language or in minds
before language. Um but language has
evolved to do the things that people
find useful. In other words, if we live
in a community where it's worth having
shades of gray, we will develop words
for shades of gray and children will
learn the words for shades of gray. If
we live in a community where the only
uh contrast we need is dark gray versus
light gray, then we will develop words
for those and children will learn the
words for those and it'll be a different
structure that gets learned.
>> Yes. And then there's the sort of a um
the the natural history and the systems
engineer path whereas the natural
history can do different gain loss
change of functions to explore in that
marian or the tinberen framework.
What kinds of architectures are embodied
by biological systems? How do they
represent space? How do they represent
color? What are their constraints on
different kinds of beliefs and updating?
Whereas there's a bit different and
freer of a hand in the systems design
because even as we're just discussing
that there's there's a plurality of ways
to represent
even
basic
declarative semantics.
Yeah. And so you can have
>> Yeah. There's a whole story here that I
haven't gone into at all. That is that
word construction
evolve over human generations by there's
a natural selection process for words.
In other words, if a word is making a
useful distinction, if the word pen is
useful in our society, then that
construction survives as it replicates
through generations.
If the word quill is no longer useful,
then it goes extinct. So that natural
selection process is superimposed on
real natural selection and happens much
faster. And that's the way languages
change that the constructions evolve by
a very fast selection process.
>> Yeah. to to that and I think on the
learning and evolutionary so within and
across generational
constraints
there's an analog of
drift selection mutation balance
where you could have one linguistic
environment
where there's a flat distribution you
you have drifts and you just have terms
just change, nouns change, and things
swap out.
And then the other extreme would be a
heavily selected linguistic environment
where there's more of a
um
like truncating selection on incorrect
language.
>> I I believe we're more at the heavily
select for linguistics. We're more at
the heavily selective end. In other
words, there are strong selection
pressures on words and all sorts of
selection pressures. Useful meanings,
simple pausing, lack of ambiguity and so
on. So words come and word word species
come into being and get extinct very
rapidly within 10 generations or
>> Yeah. Uh uh agreed. and also that even
the generational change we observe is
built on a embodied causal substrate
that's older than the mamleon. Um I'm
really curious about what you said in
the beginning about the shadow audience
as our human sense of self. So how would
you relate that to theory of mind
thinking through other minds and what
does that mean that there's a shadow
audience?
This is the part that interests me most,
I guess, and it is for the next live
stream, but I'll give you a flavor of
it. When we're talking to someone, any
conversation,
we have to reply appropriately to what
the conversational partner is saying. We
have to work out what their what what
their intention is. So, when I ask you a
question,
I am assuming that you will know that I
need to know the answer.
So that's the theory of mine. I I ask a
question, I immediately infer that, you
know, I want an answer. And that's a
typical piece of theory of mine. But
because language is about social status,
I'm thinking not only about what do you
think about this conversation? I'm
thinking, what do you think about my
social status? Do you think I'm being
impolite? Do you think I'm being
insincere
or whatever? And so that's what goes on
in conversation with you. You are the
real audience. I use my theory of mine
which is basian pattern matching to
infer what I think you are thinking
right now. So that's when I'm speaking
to you live. When I'm offline thinking
myself, I'm imagining what what am I
going to say to Dan this afternoon?
Then I imagine you and I imagine what I
say and I imagine your reaction to it.
Dan will be offended. Dan will think I'm
stupid or something like that. So there
you are my shadow audience
in my mind. I've conjured up a shadow
audience and I think what's that shadow
audience going to think of me? So that's
the origin of my sense of myself is what
I think other people are going to think
about me.
So that shadow audience was born in
conversation. You know it evolved in
conversation because I have to carry on
conversations with people. I need to
rehearse those conversation in private
thought. So when I rehearse any
conversation I have a shadow audience
and I imagine what are people going to
think of me if I say that.
So that's all for what the next talk is
about.
>> Yeah, that's quite a line
like how will I be seen or understood
but then who am I?
>> Yeah. And I believe the human sense of
self which is much more developed than
chimpan chimpanzees have a certain sense
of self. They can see themselves in a
mirror. But monkeys can't even recognize
themselves in a mirror. I think most
animals just don't have a self in that
human sense. And the human sense of self
was born with language.
And it keeps society functioning
together. I mean, that's why society
works because we're all thinking about
what other people are going to think of
us.
And that doesn't necessarily need to
entail an individual level emulation
like explicit counterfactual theory of
mind. It can also get
I would I don't know about sublimated or
sedimented into just heristics for how
we engage with groups.
>> It it I think it's not so much heristic.
It's always quick subconscious pattern
matching. If I say that, he will think
this and it's not a thought I have. It's
something that happens before I say it
and stops me saying it. So, it's very
quick and it's learned and it's
sometimes wrong. You know, I think
people who admire will I think if I buy
a Ferrari, people will will admire me.
Now that thought is actually wrong, but
it leads a lot of people to buy
Ferraris.
Yeah. And from this belief updated
hierarchical generative model
it is possible to
you can imagine a variety of other
mental operations
like you can sample phone names or
sentences from lower down in the tree
that are consistent with the upper part.
You could imagine varieties of
counterfactuals
of of how things could be differently.
You could combine this with a action
model with a with a causal world model
that could connect to those
counterfactuals.
And then we would basically be in the
setting of calculating the expected free
energy and assessing different courses
of action in terms of their epistemic
and pragmatic value.
Yeah, I mean the these things all
filtering up and down the hierarchy
basically from the phonemes of what
somebody says to you to
the top of your hierarchy of the
self-esteem my position in society and
they're all linked in one big
preconcious inference.
This pattern matching is going on the
whole time and it's subconscious
basically. Well, you have consciousness
here at the 3D generative model layer,
but
>> yeah,
>> of course,
>> there's a lot of consciousness around,
but the actual understanding a sentence,
you're doing unifications about five per
second, and that's too fast for
conscious thought.
And so, you're also having ego reactions
at at two or three per second. You're
having eager reactions faster than
conscious thought.
It's all quick basian pattern matching
big picture. I yeah I am still left with
the that pattern matching is just this
internal kind of library science almost
like there's a request coming in and
there's going to be some internal
process to match and either accept a
stringent or a fuzzy match or make a new
entry.
However, there's a second level
semantics which is the reduction of
uncertainty, minimization of surprise
regarding
the message of that request.
Yeah. Does does that message fit into
the context right now? Um that's the top
down fitting
top down and bottom bottom ups happening
all the time.
So what will we look forward to in two
weeks?
Um basically
it's how language evolved, why language
evolved
and language as I say language evolved
by sexual selection to show off
intelligence and get mates. That's
basically it. So because it's showing
off intelligence, it's all about social
status in the group and the theory of
mind part of language carrying on
conversation all about self-esteem.
Um
and basically pragmatics
how we carry on conversations has been
if you like the poor relative of
linguistics.
Everybody sub studied syntax and
semantics and they have nice systems but
pragmatics has been very much less
developed since about 1980 and in
particular
people studying pragmatics don't look at
both sides of the problem. They haven't
looked at the speaker's problem as much
as the listener's problem. Pragmatics
has been all about what the listeners do
to understand in the context what the
person is saying and it's not been about
what the speaker does to get himself
understood in the conversation. So the
next lecture is largely about pragmatics
and evolution.
Then it leads on to the human sense of
self and human nature.
>> Very cool. Anything else you want to
say or or ask on this one?
I think it's an awesome unification work
and I I out of the corner of my eye see
the kinds of graph
technology developments
that would help us make these types of
agentic or orchestrated knowledge graphs
that have elements of linguistic
semantics and quantitative graphical
models.
and those methods
um to to be able to to do assembly and
parsing of those more rapidly
to support some of these.
I I'll read one question from the live
chat. Robert, so Mills 8102 wrote, "I'm
thinking about how we have different
modes for different environments, home,
workplace, recreation, etc. I wonder
what the effects are of maintaining more
or less of these modes on someone's
adaptability.
I in in the context of language I think
that's absolutely right. We do have
different personalities and different
ways of presenting ourselves
linguistically in different
environments. we have, if you like, a
different vocabulary for work versus
home versus
sport or whatever it may be. And so that
is one dimension uh that when we go to a
different environment, we switch in a
different set of prior about what words
we're likely to hear and what people are
likely to mean by
Okay.
Well, people
>> can I just end with one appeal? I think
lang end with an appeal that language I
think is a hugely productive area for
the FE and I would very much like to be
involved in any FE implementation of
language along the lines I've sketched
and to try and take it right down to the
level of neural implementation
that I think is a hugely promising and
challenging research project and I'd
welcome anybody wants to collaborate on
it knows more about FE than I Awesome.
Thank you, Robert.
Till next time.
>> See you then.
>> See you.
>> Okay.

## nFnZSIqoFv4

Hello, welcome everyone. It is...
You want me to start, right? Sorry. Oh, can I go now?
You can.
Yeah, right.
Alright.
Okay.
Hi, this is Roland Worden here, presenting a second live stream about this unified theory of language,
which is described in an archive free print, which you can see at that address.
So this is the second live stream. In the first...
And this is a slide I showed the first time around about the various bits of language we just studied.
Phenology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, learning and evolution.
And the two bold ones, pragmatics, how we converse, and evolution, how language evolved.
Those are the bits we're going to focus on this time.
And I should say that these two columns, speaker and listener, are put in there just to remind us that you have to...
For all of these problems, you have to pay attention to both how the speaker goes about it and how the listener goes about it.
And I'll try and do that while we're going through this.
So, just a few key points from part one of the live stream.
And these are the points most relevant to this second part.
I said the language is hierarchical based in pattern matching, which is very much in line with the FEP.
And so you could have an FEP implementation language, if you'd like to,
although that hasn't been done, to my knowledge.
The approach I'd be taking here is CHOP from cognitive linguistics,
or what's also called construction grammars.
It's not a Chomskin approach.
And in cognitive linguistics, there are thousands of patterns active in language.
And in fact, there's at least one pattern for every word in a language.
So that makes thousands of patterns.
And cognitive linguistics has produced working models of analogy, syntax, semantics, and language learning.
It hasn't done so much about pragmatics.
Generally, the study of pragmatics has lagged long behind the study of the other subjects like semantics and syntax.
So in cognitive linguistics, every word is represented by what they call a construction.
That is a feature structure, which is a directed acyclic graph structure.
And I showed some examples of these.
And the key operation in language in these construction-based grammars is unification.
And I showed that unification is a form of Bayesian pattern matching.
So that's the key points from the first live stream.
What this live stream is going to be about is mainly about pragmatics and evolution.
I should start by saying language long ago started in conversation.
And we had conversations before we had syntax and semantics.
Language evolved by sexual selection for the display of intelligence.
That's how language got started.
And because of that, language is a biased thing.
Language is not, as some people imagine, a kind of neutral format for talking about reality.
It's actually biased to be all about social status.
And I'll try to illustrate that.
Now, coming back to pragmatic conversation, conversation requires mind reading.
That's the essential requirement to carry on a conversation.
And then I shall present a model of pragmatic, model of conversations,
which is built on Bayesian pattern matching, just like the syntax and semantics we talked about in the last live stream.
And so the basis of this is that we learn mind reading patterns.
And in those mind reading patterns, we often, when we're thinking, we often have what I call a shadow audience,
which we're trying to work out what the shadow audience will think about what we say and what we do.
So that shadow audience is a kind of something we imagine, which assesses our own status.
And the shadow audience is the basis of the human self.
And so the shadow audience is very important because it's the basis of all human self is the basis of all societies, how we collaborate.
But also it has a dark side. And that is, I shall describe the main affliction of mankind.
And finally, I should talk a little about mindfulness, which is a release from the human self and the shadow audience.
So that's the main topic that I'm going to discuss in this live stream.
Just get straight into it. Language started in conversation.
Imagine about a million years ago, before we had semantics or syntax, we started to converse with each other.
The semantics part of it was by mimicking, by gesture and by pointing.
You point a thing, draw attention to them and so on.
And for all conversation between two people, there has to be a common ground of shared understanding between those two people.
And so a conversation starts with two people both understanding something about their current situation.
And each turn in the conversation, one person, then another person, each turn adds some facts of the common ground.
And some of these facts are about the mental states of the speakers.
And I shall illustrate this in a minute.
So because of that, conversation requires mind reading, requires each person to infer things about the other person's mental state.
And that we do by Bayesian pattern matching.
And so a very important part of pragmatics is the study of speech acts.
Speech acts are ways in which one party in a conversation adds facts about his own mental state to the common ground.
And just to give an example of this, a very early conversation, say a million years ago, between two people, A and B.
And they have a certain common ground, the red points before the conversation starts.
The common ground is that time is the afternoon.
A is a man who's just been hunting.
B is a son.
There's a fire that they can both see.
And there is some meat because A brought it back from hunting.
And they both have some general knowledge about the world.
They both know that to eat some meat, you have to cook it.
So that stuff above the dashed line is the common ground at the start.
And the conversation between them, I show it is illustrated by these points here, which each add facts to the common ground.
So A says eat and he points to something.
And so he's offering that B might eat something.
That's an office speech act.
B says yes.
And so B accepts the offer of A.
And then B says you cook.
And B wants to know who's going to do the cooking.
So B wants B a state in which B knows who is going to do the cooking.
So you can see here, we're building up facts about both parties' mental states.
A says yes.
So that adds the fact that A is going to do the cooking.
So those are the facts which are explicitly added to the common ground.
There are other facts which can be deduced from that.
Because they're in the common ground, B knows that A is going to do the cooking.
A knows that B knows that A is going to do the cooking.
So there are loads of mental state facts in the common ground.
And the conversation proceeds by speech acts, which have different kinds, like offers and questions and answers and so on,
which add facts to the common ground.
So that's the basic model of a conversation.
How conversations started a long time ago, before we had elaborate syntax or semantics, before most of language.
So in this picture, semantics came about by making speech acts more fine-grained.
There are a few broad types of speech act, which are declarations where you say something and offer a request or a command or a question and so on.
And each speech act adds some facts about your own mental state to the common ground.
Now semantics is how we develop language to allow speech acts to be more fine-grained.
They can be about certain agents or acts or patients.
They can be at different times or different attitudes to them and so on.
So that's how semantics came about.
And syntax is just the structure of language we need to convey semantics.
So in this picture, syntax and semantics came out of pragmatic.
Pragmatic came first.
Now that, interestingly, is quite the reverse of the order in which language has been traditionally studied.
There's been a long-term study of syntax and semantics starting way back when.
And pragmatics has always been a kind of poor relation that came later.
But in this picture, pragmatics actually came first.
So what is pragmatics?
It's studied under a number of headings and these on the left-hand side are the traditional headings under which we've studied pragmatics.
And here are some examples of it.
Here are some speech acts, a greeting, hello, there's a request, can you pass the salt?
And the same sort of structure but a very different thing is a question, can you pole vault?
In other words, this wants the listener to do something.
And this wants the listener to just provide some information.
And here's an answer, no.
Reference resolution, sometimes called deixis.
In other words, we're always using noun phrases, nouns, referring to things.
We have to work out what thing precisely is being referred to.
So you use the word him.
Somebody's got to work out what him refers to.
Or you talk about the blue one near the back.
Somebody has to work out what that is.
Now, there are a couple of topics which are commonly studied, which are quite closely related.
Presupposition and implicature.
Both of them, you're actually beyond the obvious thing that you're saying, there's something else added to the conversation, to the common ground.
Presupposition is when you say something, it presupposes something else.
You say, my cat's not hungry.
That presupposes you've got a cat.
When you say he regrets going to Spain, that kind of presupposes he actually did go to Spain.
Implicature is an implication of what you say.
You say, shall we ask him?
Oh, he's got an essay to write.
And the listener has to work out.
That means he can't come along.
Or if you say, I caught some of the geese.
You're somehow implying that you didn't catch all of the geese.
So those are presuppositions and implicature.
Then there are other topics like irony, where you say, yeah, sure.
Or that's really brilliant.
Or hyperbole, exaggerate, you're a genius.
Or metaphor, where you say, she's a brick.
In other words, she's a very reliable person.
Or you say, he's a chocolate teapot.
You're saying the opposite.
He's an unreliable person.
So those are some of the subjects in pragmatics.
And the model of pragmatics has to give some account of all of them.
And you can see if you look at them, look at each example.
There is the common ground features in how you work out what's going on and mind reading features as well.
What I've developed recently is a Bayesian model of pragmatics.
And I'll just try and describe in outline how it works.
So both people in their heads have a version of the common ground.
They start with a shared understanding of what's going on.
And each fact in the common ground has a think-all-out, which I call prominent.
A very prominent fact is the most recent thing added to the common ground, as well as a Bayesian probability.
And if some facts you can infer from other facts, generally the inferred facts are less prominent than the things they're inferred from.
So in this model, there are pragmatic constructions, which are just like the word constructions of syntax and semantics that I talked about last time.
So facts in the common ground are created by unifying various things together.
The sound of the utterances that you hear or are going to speak, pragmatic constructions and prior facts in the common ground.
These unifications are always done in an order, prominence first until you get a good enough result.
And unification, as I said last time, is Bayesian pattern matching.
So pragmatic constructions are just like the other constructions of language like word constructions.
They have a phonetic pole, which includes the sound part and the semantic pole and may include other things as well.
And a semantic pole, which includes only the meaning.
So what happens in a conversation is that the speaker and the listener unifies the same pragmatic construction.
The speakers unify in one direction from the semantic pole to the phonetic pole and listeners go in the opposite direction.
They hear sounds that they go from the phonetic pole to the semantic pole.
So this is a version of both how the speakers work out what to say and how the listeners work out what they mean.
And as a result of this in the model, you can show how both versions of the common ground, the speaker's version and the listener's version, stay in step.
And so this is a model in which semantics comes out of the pragmatics.
Now, this model of pragmatics is different from the way pragmatics has been studied in the past.
Previous work on pragmatics has been in two different schools.
This so-called Neo-Grythian school, which is named after the philosopher Paul Grice, who really started the study of pragmatics in about 1960s.
And the names associated with the Neo-Grythian school are Horne and Stephen Levinson and various others.
And the other school of pragmatics is called relevance theory, which is started by Dan Sperber and I and Deirdre Wilson.
Now, both of those schools take the traditional view that semantics comes first and the mind, the listener or the speaker does a bunch of semantics first and then chucks the result over the wall, if you like, to a pragmatic inference part of the brain.
And both schools place all their emphasis on the work has to be done by the listener to understand what he hears.
And they both practically ignore the problem of the work done by the speaker to work out what to say next to be understood.
So they're very not sighted.
The other thing about those models is they describe the pragmatic inference in words, in verbal descriptions, and they don't have really working models.
So the advantages of this approach over previous approaches is there's no fixed boundary between pragmatics and semantics.
Two are intermingled all the way.
This is a joint model that solves both sides of the problem, the speaker's problem and the listener problem.
And it's a continuous extension of the Bayesian model that I described in the last live stream.
And it's an extension of cognitive linguistics.
And the final advantage is it works.
And it works fast because one thing in our conversations is that we can respond in conversation very fast.
And there's a puzzle about how we do all the inferences we required so rapidly.
In this model, the inferences are done pre-consciously by Bayesian pattern matching just by like so many other things in the mind.
Right. So there's the model of pragmatics.
I shall now skip to a different subject to come back to pragmatic later.
How did language evolve?
I discussed this to a certain extent in the last live stream.
And in the first live stream I said language uses hierarchical Bayesian pattern matching like so many things in the brain.
And this talk addresses part two.
How did language evolve particularly in mankind and in no other species?
So that is the next few slides.
I shall first talk about natural selection and sexual selection.
As we well know, to pass on your genes, you need to do two things.
You need to survive until you're an adult and you can reproduce,
and you need to find a mate in order to reproduce.
So these are really different kinds of pressures.
They lead respectively to natural selection,
how you survive to adulthood, and sexual selection,
how you find a mate.
Now sexual selection is a very common force in nature.
It leads to the kind of displays that we see in flowers and birds,
plumage and all sorts of things.
It leads to the diversity of species on the planet,
and it leads to sexual dimorphs and the differences between males and females.
So if I say language involved evolution involved sexual selection,
that's really not a remarkable thing to say.
It would be much more remarkable if sexual selection were not involved
in the evolution of language.
So the hypothesis is, which I published in Frontiers Journal,
that language evolved...
I'm sorry, I'll talk a little more about how sexual selection works first.
Natural selection is a gradual adaptation to the habitat.
So it's a hill climbing process, an optimization process.
Sexual selection is very different.
The maths of sexual selection worked out about 1980 by Landay
and by John Maydard Smith.
And the maths is a positive feedback process,
positive feedback between genes in the male and genes in the female.
And the results of sexual...
of this mathematical model, which agree with the data,
are sexual selection leads to novel and vivid traits,
just like the peacock's tail shown here.
Fast visible changes of phenotype.
Again, the peacock's tail is very visible
because it has to be visible to get a sale find a mate.
And the results of sexual selection are always unique to one species.
The peacock's completely different from any other species of birds.
The results of sexual selection are always exaggerated,
strongly exaggerated beyond what is most fit.
So the peacock's tail obviously is a big handicap for the male peacock,
but it needs that to get a mate.
So the final point is they are handicapped.
So these are the results of sexual selection.
Novel, fast changes, unique to a species, exaggerated and handicaps.
So here's the hypothesis, which I published about a couple of years ago in Frontiers,
that language evolved by sexual selection, particularly to display intelligence.
In order to get a mate, we have to show off our intelligence.
And that, as I say, is a very unremarkable hypothesis,
but it does answer the big questions of language evolution.
So here are some of the questions and the answers.
Why do we have such ludicrously large brains?
The answer is there is sexual selection to display intelligence.
And to display intelligence, you always have to have it.
Why language? Why do we display intelligence by language?
Because words is a very quick and efficient way to show off our intelligence.
Why is language so amazingly fast and expressive?
In fact, it's much faster than we would need in a natural habitat for any natural purpose,
like arranging hunts or arranging gathering or whatever, planning a camp.
Language can say things in a few seconds, whereas for practical purposes,
you might be able to take a few minutes.
And language is so fast because sexual selection causes exaggerated traits.
The speed of language has been exaggerated beyond the biological need.
A big question about language evolution is why do closely related species,
particularly chimps, not have language like ours?
They're so different.
And the answer is simply sexual selection is unique to a species.
It's not a habitat selection pressure.
It's a species internal selection pressure.
And the final question, why do we have language when the benefits of language
don't match the huge costs of our extra brain,
our large brain, 20% extra food requirement?
And the answer is sexual selection causes handicaps.
So all in all, it seems very likely that language did evolve in this process
by sexual selection and it is a tool for doing practical things.
We do practical things with it.
Primarily, it's a tool for showing off our intelligence.
Now, intelligence is related to social status.
We show off our intelligence using language as a way to get a mate.
But getting a mate also requires high status in the social group.
So when we're using language, we're always very concerned about our own social status.
And what this means is that when we're doing conversation using these pragmatic mind reading patterns,
we use those patterns to infer not only what the other person knows about the world in general,
but what they think about us.
In other words, in a conversation, we're always asking ourselves questions like,
Will he think I'm impolite?
Will she think I'm being uncaring?
And these are all to do with our social status.
So this is a very powerful pre-conscious filter of what we say.
In other words, we often ask these questions.
We say, no, I better not say that.
But it's done very quickly because there's a famous result from Levent and Torreira
that people take turns in conversations within a fifth of a second of the other person's stopping.
They work these things out very rapidly.
The way they work them out rapidly is by pre-conscious Bayesian pattern matching with these so-called status patterns.
And we have hundreds of those status patterns.
If I say this, they will think I'm good or bad, Torreira maybe.
So intelligence, showing off intelligence in language is very closely related to maintaining our social status.
Language is about social status.
We can see that not from the evolution of language, but from the present day properties of what language looks like now.
We can take various aspects of language and show how they are relevant to status.
The most basic aspect of language is the structure of a sentence.
Agent, act, patient or agent, act.
And this kind of implies that the agent has chosen to do something.
The agent is exercised in free will and will be judged by the results of those actions.
The contrast with animals is animals, of course, have no free will.
They just do what the moment requires.
So animals don't make choices.
Language obviously has future tense and past tense.
And why was that introduced?
Because people's status can be judged, not only by what they're doing now, but what they did in the past and what they will do in the future.
And again, there's a big contrast with the animals that we evolved from.
Animals just live in the present.
I think their minds have little or no use for future episodes or past episodes.
So animals would not be able to use the future or past tense.
Possession language has words like mine, your and so on.
They're introduced because possession is control and control has status implications.
If I've got a fast car, if it's mine, then that increases by status.
Some people think.
Animals, of course, don't have possessions.
There are modal verbs in language, verbs like can and should and would and so on.
Can implies that you've chose that you can choose to do things or not to do things.
Should implies society thinks you ought to do it.
It's a good action.
So both those, all those modal verbs are laden with status and implication.
Whereas animals don't choose what to do and they don't modal verbs are not relevant to them.
Can't say an animal can do this.
Animal either does this or it doesn't do that.
We have mental state verbs, knows and wants and intends.
Again, states of mind are very relevant to status.
If somebody has bad intentions, that's a low status thing to be.
Language has comparisons, bigger, better and so on.
Comparison is relevant to social ranking.
In other words, bigger and so on.
It's always putting people in order of social ranking.
So language is absolutely soaked with features which are all to do with social status.
It's not neutral.
And with every utterance, we pre-consciously infer what it implies about our own status in the eyes of other people.
Using these learned status patterns.
And that brings me onto an important topic called the shadow audience.
When we talk to somebody, we're pre-consciously inferring what that person will think about us.
We're matching these status patterns to filter what we say.
But when we're on our own privately thinking, that evolved as a rehearsal of what we're going to say.
That's thinking is rehearsing what we might say to somebody.
And we'd rehearse in order to make it more impressive.
But when you're privately thinking, there is no real audience there.
So what we do is we invent shadow audiences.
People we know who we imagine how they will judge what we say.
They could be parents or friends or just people in general.
We use these status patterns that we learned in conversation to infer what the shadow audience is going to think of us.
And this is a very important part of our thought process.
It's going on the whole time and it makes us feel emotional reaction.
In other words, if I think this is going to make me look bad, I start to feel bad.
And so the shadow audience is actually what creates the human idea of myself.
That's the agent self.
That's the myself who's going to act and who's going to be judged by other people on the basis of what I say and do.
So the shadow audience is the thing that really creates the human sense of self,
which is much more elaborate and complex than any animal sense of itself.
So with that in mind, we can consider how thoughts work in fractions of a second.
And there you are thinking, hearing the words in your mind, and you may be hearing about two or two, three or four words every second.
And so your brain is doing some very fast pre-conscious pattern matching and matching two to four word patterns per second just to make up the sentence.
And it's matching those status patterns as well to think what will people think of me.
And the status patterns make you feel emotions.
And what happens when you feel an emotion is that bodily feeling may match some further status patterns into cascades of status patterns.
And this is all happening fast than conscious thought.
So that's why we feel such irrational and unpredictable emotions sometimes.
And it comes to the quote from Blaise Pascal,
Le peur à ses raisons que la raison ne connaît pas.
The heart has its own reason which reason doesn't understand because it's happening faster than conscious reasoning.
So this leads to what I call the dark side of language.
These learned status patterns are part of language and they enable us to cooperate with each other as members of society.
So this is what has underpinned the whole of human progress, why we conquer the planet.
But these status patterns do have a dark side.
We are constantly feeling anxious that we should be doing better.
And we have this idea of myself as other people think about me, but it's a second-hand idea.
It's not what I think of me.
It's what I think other people think.
And there's a flawed idea because the patterns we use aren't perfect.
They're very inaccurate sometimes.
So we are constantly looking at our own life history to polish it and refine it to preserve our self-esteem.
We feel these emotions in chaotic ways.
And to keep our shadow audiences happy, we agree with what we think they're going to think.
In other words, we don't think for ourselves.
We think, what would the group think about this?
That's group think.
And the second part of that is to enhance our own status.
We have out-groups.
We have other people who, in other groups, who would diminish them and we diminish their status.
So this is what leads to tribalism and intolerance.
So the dark side of language is the root of human affliction and evil.
It's produced some great things in society and civilization, but some very bad things, which we're all aware of.
So next I come onto the topic of meditation and mindfulness.
Recapping what I've said before.
The human agent self, the self which acts and which is judged by other people, is learned in language in these status patterns.
Now, I believe the mindful states are states in which that agent self is diminished or absent.
This agrees very well with the phenomenal reports of what it's like to be in mindful state.
And there's a very good collection of these phenomenal reports in a book by Metzinger called The Elephant and the Blind.
And we can go through these reports of what mindful states are like in Metzinger.
And we can interpret them in terms of the hypothesis that it's all about language status patterns.
So meditative states are relaxed and peaceful.
And the reason is that the anxiety in the cascades of thought, the status patterns create, are reduced in meditative states.
There's a silence of non-reaction about it.
And when there's less language going on, there are few active status patterns.
And even when thoughts arise, they can be just observed as thoughts without reactions.
There's a sense of non-identification, no self, no physical boundaries and the connectedness with other things.
And the interpretation here is that the agent self is created by the status patterns and creates the boundary between the self and the rest of the world.
And so that boundary gets dissolved.
There is a lot of compassion in meditative states.
And the interpretation is that when the agent self is not protecting its own status, we are more open to seeing what life is really like for other people,
than seeing the world from their point of view.
In meditation, there is no time.
In deep meditation, there's no time and there's no life stories.
Chronological time has been created by language, driven by status concerns.
And we build these life stories to protect our own status.
When we're not concerned with our own status, we're not concerned with life stories.
There is a sense of clarity in what the meditations call suchness in meditation.
And what this is, is when we don't classify things according to whether they're good or bad for us,
we can look at them more closely and see what they really are.
There's a sense in meditation sometimes of nothing left to do.
What that means simply is that the agent self is not present, created by the status patterns.
There's no need for action.
As meditation is associated with non-duality, the duality between self and other is brought about by language.
And when language is less active, there's less duality.
So that is the correlation between reports of what meditation is like and the theory that it's really a lack of language,
and the lack of the status patterns that makes it like that.
So we can approach this from another angle.
Some of the traditional things we know about Buddhism, many aspects of Buddhism we can interpret from this point of view.
The first noble truth of Buddhism is Dukkha, suffering.
But what this is, is continual discontent from the action of status patterns saying,
we should be doing better.
When they're absent, Dukkha is absent.
The Buddhist cycle of birth and rebirth is interesting.
It doesn't mean we reincarnate physically, literally reborn.
What it means is that there's an agent self, which language is created,
and it recreates itself in cascades or cycles.
The shadow audience creates the self and the self creates the shadow audience.
So that cycle gets abolished.
The nirvana, or non-duality, is when that cycle is no longer there,
allowing the non-dual experiencing self to be there.
Buddhism often uses the word conditioning.
That simply means the learning of status patterns that we learnt in language.
The one flavor of Zen Buddhism is probably the most strident rejection of language.
Zen Buddhism says you can't describe any of this in language at all.
So that interpretation of mindfulness accords with long known teachings of Buddhism.
Zen Buddhism says you can't learn a word.
Now, here is a hypothesis about how we learn mindfulness.
We know from language that we never unlearn a word.
Once you've learnt a word, we've got it for life, really.
So how can, if we've got these status patterns and they're the problem,
how can we unlearn them?
We can't unlearn the status pattern.
So how can we reduce their influence on us?
Well, there is a way because basic pattern matching is always competitive.
It's always several kinds of patterns are tried out
and only the one that wins the competition goes on to have a conscious effect.
The patterns that lose the competition don't have conscious effects.
So here's the hypothesis about how we learn mindfulness.
the status patterns, the status patterns that drive our emotions are triggered by feelings on our bodies.
But when meditating, what we do is we observe those bodily feelings as closely as we can.
And while we're doing that, as a side effect, we learn some new patterns,
which are called mindful patterns.
And these new patterns say when you see, when you feel certain bodily feelings,
like something you're breathing or something,
a stomach or whatever it may be,
simply pay closer attention to them, find out what they're like.
So this is a different pattern from the status pattern.
And so what happens is that mindful patterns compete against the status patterns
and win the competition.
So the status patterns are less influential when you pay attention to the mindful patterns.
So mindful states happen when status patterns are diminished or absent.
So there is a hypothesis about how meditation is learned.
Now, finally, last slide really, is a switch of topic,
something that I've postponed for some time, but an important aspect of language in all ways.
Every language consists of a very large number of constructions,
word constructions and status instructions and so on.
Each one of them is like a species and the whole language is like a habitat and ecology.
And one species reproduces by being used and learned and passed on.
So this is what happens.
People use a certain word, children hear it and they learn it, they pass it on.
And in that evolution, so that process evolves constructions.
Constructions compete with each other, compete against other constructions
and there are very strong selection pressures on the construction and the language.
They should have a useful meaning,
that people actually need to speak them, need to say them from time to time.
They must be brief enough.
If somebody can say things quickly, they'll do it the other way.
They must be unambiguous enough and they must be learnable.
So there are selection pressures on constructions, on words and status patterns,
which cause them to evolve.
They lead to very fast language change.
That's why language changes within a few human generations.
And what that means is that much of the structure we see in language is the result of that fast evolution.
And it's not the evolution of the human brain that made it that way.
For instance, there are language universals about the structure of most languages.
And they are telling us how languages have evolved.
And what that means is that language is actually telling us less about the human brain than we thought it did.
Okay, so that's the end of the second live stream of the prepared material.
There are various topics you might like to discuss.
How mind reading patterns operate in conversation.
Whether language did evolve by sexual selection.
How language is about status.
Status patterns use a shadow audience.
The human sense of self based on the shadow audience of being a rather second hand idea of ourselves.
Language and human affliction.
Mindfulness and evolution of language balance.
So, over for any questions.
Thank you, Robert.
There's a few things I wrote down and then I think this is a great menu.
And I'll also look in the live chat if anyone writes a question.
Okay, so.
Lot to think slash say in that self-aware language nexus.
I was wondering what could or would address that shadow side of language.
Is that a feature of some of the constraints of a given language?
Like reification of processes or objects or affixing adjectives in some way that somehow disrespects the ontological aspects of properties of systems?
Or is it like any symbolic machine or any symbolic approximation is going to have a shadow?
Or what is the alternative?
Or is it that shadow is a necessary follow?
It's a consequence of proposing symbolic representation of the ecological scenario.
Well, I think it came very early on.
In other words, we had shadow audiences before we had much semantics before we had much syntax before we had much symbolic systems.
You go back to the very early conversations.
Let me just go right back.
Conversation before people had many words, they just used pointing and took turns in conversation.
I think even then, people had real conversations in which they imagined what the other person thought of them.
So the real audience was there and people imagined conversations, rehearsed conversations.
So they had shadow audiences.
So I think the issues of shadow audience and status go way back beyond symbolic systems and beyond syntax and semantics.
So does it exacerbate or ameliorate the fundamental non-linguistic game theory of conformity and group living?
I think it's the root of it.
I think it's the origins, where it all came from.
But I think we wouldn't be-
Group living was prior to vocalization, though not necessarily prior to pheromonal or stigmatic communication.
Yeah, that's a very interesting question.
Whether that, I mean, whether that actually preceded language evolution.
In other words, in a chimpanzee group, they are conscious of their own status, probably.
They know some other chimps have higher status than them.
But I think this all became exaggerated in humans because of the sexual selection for showing off intelligence.
It became so much more complicated because we added intelligence to the mix as the thing that was sexy and attractive.
And that made it all so much more complicated.
Hmm.
Okay.
Where do you think this relates to a priori languages or to our sort of current cognitive linguistically informed use of language?
How do you see this propositional explication of the role of language in cognition and evolution reentering into human language use?
As opposed to language being a useful tool, but not necessarily itself theorized about?
I'm not sure I get the question.
Like, do you think this will lead us to constructed languages or to elaboration or simplification of languages or some other way to think about how media and different formats of communication are used or norms around required or forbidden methods of communication based upon a grounded understanding of what the consequences of those violations of those norms would be?
Well, I think I don't see much future for synthetic languages used by people.
You know, I mean, people develop language, languages evolve as in the previous slide to be useful people.
And so I don't see that synthetic languages will do anything except evolve to be like ordinary languages.
Am I answering the question?
Probably not.
I think, I mean, that's kind of a funny conclusion.
But yes, the goal of a constructed language would be to become an ordinary one.
And how would you relate it to language of thought?
And if we have the cessation, whether we take this in a more meditative direction or not, what is in the absence of verbal or linguistic mental chatter?
What is the structure of thought that occurs without language?
Great question.
Well, perhaps you should look at medicine in his book to what he thinks goes on when there's not language happening.
But I think we always have a physical imagination.
We always can physically imagine situations and run simulation and work out what happens next.
So that's a component of thought which is going on even when language is going on.
I think everyday thought is a mixture of physically imagining things and putting words around it.
And the physically imagining things still goes on when you don't have words.
Physically meaning the situational and spatial awarenesses?
Spatial awareness, yeah.
How would you think the analog wave or spatial representations interface mechanistically or just cognitively with that naming process?
Is there a supervisor of that spatial wave that names or is the wave become translated into some describable process?
Well, if you'd say, if you believe as I do, the basis of consciousness, spatial consciousness is this wave in the thalamus, then that happens in all higher animals.
And any higher animal can take its spatial experience and can find things in the space around it and classify them.
You know, you can classify here's an insect, here's a flower, whatever.
So that classification into categories that are useful for the animal has evolved into classification into things that we name as human speakers.
So it goes back to animals.
But the animal brain has always been able to link the wave with classifications or things that are useful to know about.
Okay, I'll read some comments in the chat and we can look at these and some of these other topics.
I really enjoy the, Robert.
You're bringing a huge amount of inquiry and research to bear.
And it just lightly touches on a lot of key areas that brings a conciliance to a lot of the cognitive and linguistic quest, which is just, it's the water we swim in, metaphorically speaking.
Okay, Active Bloomology wrote, language as cause of human affection, please?
Affliction.
Affliction.
Is there possibly a connection with speech being disembodied?
Speech being disembodied.
I mean, I struggle to find a connection really.
I mean, speech is disembodied.
Is that referring to the fact words are kind of arbitrary sequences of sounds and don't have any resemblance to the things they're talking about?
I think if that's the question, that words are totally decoupled from their meaning in terms of the sound sequence has nothing to do with what the word means.
I think that feature of language arose because we need so many words.
And we need words for things which there's no possible way in which the sound can resemble the concept.
And so we just need some arbitrary string of sounds to represent some concept.
Again, I'm not, I feel I'm not answering the question here.
Yes, that reminds me of kind of Schrodinger's What is Life and about the quasi periodic crystal and about the way that there, there, there has to be some substrate that has enough reuse and modularity to allow recomposition.
But then that, to the extent that those compositions are meaningful, and this is also kind of explored in the Gerdel-Escher Bach, the subunits do not have that type of meaning.
Yeah, that's right.
Letters mean things that words can't, words must do and mean things that sentences can't, and like they, they partition into this hierarchical Bayesian niche.
And so then that creates these smaller artifacts which need to be taken in a Gestalt context.
Yeah, they have to be arbitrary in some way.
Yeah, and that defies sort of reductionism.
We don't, we don't take a magnifying glass and look deeper at the pixels on the paper.
But how about this human sense of self is secondhand and flawed.
So, we're having a first-hand experience of that secondhand flawed concept.
So, what is the first-hand experience if the secondhand is flawed?
The first-hand, the first-hand concept of self would be me thinking about myself directly.
I do this, I do that, and therefore I am that way or this way.
The second-hand concept is me not thinking about me as my own personal experience, but me trying to imagine what other people think of me.
And me trying to guess, does my bum look big in these trousers sort of thing?
What do I look like to other people?
That's the secondhand part of it.
It's not my, my idea of me.
It's my idea of what other people are thinking of me and why it's flawed.
One reason is that I'm imagining what other people think of me when other people are actually not thinking about me.
They're just thinking about themselves.
And I'm also doing it by these quick Bayesian patterns, pattern matching, which are sometimes inaccurate.
People's idea of themselves, as we know, can be very inaccurate.
So, that's why I say it's secondhand flawed.
So, that's kind of like the thinking through other, other minds, TTOM.
Why is that flawed when we could also have a first-hand experience that has false positive or false negative assertions?
Well, it's secondhand that it's in a mirror, the mirror of other people.
It's flawed in that when we learn these patterns in conversation, the self patterns, status patterns, we are only learning what we need to carry on a conversation.
If once we've learned something good enough to carry on a conversation with somebody, that's it.
It needn't learn any more.
But that may not be an accurate view of what they really think of us.
We're extrapolating from, in conversation, we kind of direct evidence of what the other person's thinking because they, if we say something wrong, they, or something that's based on a misconception, they will correct us.
But the shadow audience in private thought can never correct us.
So, we can get away with errors.
We can apply status patterns that are just wrong in private thought and nobody will ever correct us.
Whereas in public conversation, people will sometimes correct us.
Interesting, because that shadow audience can also be a sort of critical internal commentary.
So, it can make critical comments.
Oh yeah, absolutely.
It can drive that.
It can drive that.
I mean, it can lead to internal conscious experience of, you can, it's pre-conscious, it's pre-conscious pattern matching, but it can lead to conscious trying to make it better, trying to work out what other people will think of you.
But the conscious stuff is always going so much slower than the pre-conscious pattern matching.
So, the pattern matching is going at two or three patterns, status patterns per second.
Conscious thought is going one new thought every five seconds.
Yeah.
I'm very interested in that.
Like, what kinds of exercises or experiments help us get a look at that fine-toothed gear or that kind of splicing of the moment that happens at the sub-second level?
How do you, how over your life and research have you explored that and how did it come to be the way that you think of it now?
Well, I don't think we really have a microscope to look at our own thinking at the sub-second level.
So, this is kind of theoretical speculation.
It's saying how language works.
I mean, I know that when I hear somebody speaking at three words per second, I'm doing three fast Bayesian pattern matches per second to understand what he's saying.
I'm doing more than that because I'm trying out several other patterns which don't make the cut, so to speak.
So, I know it happens, but I can't look at myself internally and say what's happening at one-fifth or second interval.
The only thing I can do towards that is practice mindfulness when I slow down some of this stuff and perhaps get some other insights into what's going on.
I mean, I think in mindfulness you do experience life without the urge to do things and life without the urge to change things.
And you can bring insights out of that which are valuable to you.
This is what happens.
But, no, there's no way of putting a microscope on your own thought.
How do you relate that to neuro-phenomenology and to cognitive science and what kinds of tools or what apparatus measurement or perturbation apparatuses do you think would further this line?
Well, I mean, in the lab we could do MRI experiments or to actually find out.
I mean, perhaps we could actually get an experimental probe of Bayesian pattern matching of words in the lab and see these things happening externally in a person in a scanner.
But that's a speculation. We're not very close to that yet.
I think. Well, we see what parts of the brain language is happening.
But to get the detailed patterns about how status patterns are happening, for instance, would be it's possible, but not happened yet.
Where do you see this, these research questions going or taking you over the coming years for yourself and for the field?
Like, what are we seeking to reduce our uncertainty about?
What would be the learning moments and what would be the utilities?
Well, firstly, the learning moments. What are we trying to reduce our uncertainty about?
I think we're still trying to get a decent model of language.
I think the world has been very confused by Chomsky and linguistics, which has introduced a load of red herrings.
I think the picture of cognitive linguistics needs to be reinforced.
And I think in research terms, as I've tried to do in these talks, you need to extend cognitive linguistics beyond syntax and semantics to do pragmatics.
I think we need to validate a good model of pragmatics by testing it against lots and lots of pragmatic phenomena and building those models computationally that work.
And that's what I'm going to be trying to do, build a working computational model of pragmatics.
So I think there's a lot we can do to improve our theoretical understanding of language.
Now, where was I going with that?
Oh, yeah. In terms of the practical impact, I think there is potentially huge practical impact because there is so much suffering and bad things happening in the world as a result of the shadow audiences and a result of status patterns.
And mindfulness does offer some relief from that.
So I think a better scientific understanding of mindfulness might in time lead to better ways of learning it and teaching it and more widespread mindfulness, more widespread appreciation of why the big bad things go wrong in the world.
And who knows, we might eventually be able to collaborate with each other enough to solve problems like climate change.
So there are huge practical implications if mindfulness is a way forward on these afflictions of the human race.
So I think that's a way to embrace mindfulness.
Yeah, there's a lot there in the the scale of coordination that difference communication and trust mechanisms enable.
enable. Several of these pieces are about sexual selection and about that sort of,
about how even though the sexual environment is natural, it still has selective signatures
that can be distinguished from the abiotic niche with selection operating on it.
And I guess what, where does that line take us understanding that although language helps
us address these basic biotic challenges, it is also able to be harnessed by mimetic
or even, yeah, transient peacock type dynamics or green beard dynamics, all these different
more evolutionary sub games that exist. Like, is that our, our fated condition or would there
be a way to...
Well, I, I mean, I don't think evolutionary timescales are of interest here. And those evolutionary
timescales are at least thousands of years before the human species changes in any perceptible
way. I think we've got much less time than that. I think we need to understand how the
human race shoots itself in the foot repeatedly over the next 50 or 100 years and start getting
an understanding of why we do that and how we can do it less out into common understanding,
not esoteric scientific understanding, much more widely in the next 100 years, so that people
are less beset by these status issues and tribalism and groupthink and so on and so forth. In the
general public, the whole 9 billion people on the planet, a large proportion of them should
be somehow see mindfulness as less esoteric, less mystical and the practical common sense thing
to live better and more cooperatively. I don't know how that's going to happen or whether it's
going to happen, but it is a possibility.
In the chat, what does modelling pragmatics with others look like? What does which pragmatics?
What does modelling pragmatics with others look like? Like possibly what is that in practice,
what kinds of conversational games or exercises or trainings or experiences could help bring
a fluency to those who are exploring what it means to model pragmatics of language together?
How do people bring this into their daily conversations? Is it...
I don't think they do. I think it's a matter of understanding how we do daily conversation,
not trying to manipulate that in any way. In other words, what we do in conversation...
Well, let me step back a bit. What we do in conversation is a product of this learning
conditioning process where we learn all these word patterns, we learn status patterns. I think one very
important change mechanism is to... is really with young children when they're learning. And maybe there are ways in which adults can structure the environment, just bring children up better so that they don't learn the harmful status patterns. And I don't think that is in the structure of conversations. It's in understanding where self-esteem is.
where self-esteem comes from, understanding how you give a child space in which to learn about things and not learn the harmful self-esteem patterns. So I think that is a tremendous potential for progress. If we understand better how to bring up our children and do so, so they're more sane than we were.
I'm also sometimes struck by that with bringing cognitive science into day to day, but there isn't anything else to do or bring in. Any activity is going to fall into this category.
It's more of a lens that helps us understand any kinds of speech acts.
I think that's right. It's a lens that helps us understand rather than manipulate or change.
Language is about status is still so interesting to me as well. Because seemingly, apparently there are expressions that don't relate to status.
Are those just accessory expressions that are kind of tributary, kind of corollary expressions that don't really arise from the main thrust?
Or do we translate even the status personification,
personification,
objectification, ranking,
judging,
on to even like,
well, this is my favorite coin on the table.
And basically applies status games to even objects.
Anything we can talk about
can have possible status reverberations in some people who hear it.
You know, you can't.
No, so I mean, the basic idea is that people have usually thought of language as some kind of neutral medium, harmless medium,
and all benefits medium,
and all benefits medium,
which we use to talk about reality.
And it's neutral and it doesn't bias our view of reality.
What I'm saying is that really it's so soaked in status as in this slide.
I'll come back to this slide here.
Language is so soaked in status that more or less any sentence you say is going to bring in status issues in some listeners.
And it's going to reverberate with them.
And more or less anything you say can,
even when you're talking about some abstract scientific topic,
if you're favoring a scientific theory or hypothesis,
which somebody else has worked on a different hypothesis,
that immediately reverberates with their self-esteem.
They don't like it when different ideas challenge their own.
So,
speech acts are political.
Actually, this slide that you have right here,
this relates to sort of the man as political animal,
and about the distinction between zoo and bios,
and like zoology and biology,
and about different...
There's just a lot of interesting etymology and theory there that Agamben and others have explored about.
The zoo, like zoology, is this right column with the animal layer.
And then the layer of what is added beyond that, that makes, you know, human the political animal.
Yeah, I mean, I could have used the word politics in many places in this talk.
Yeah, it comes in.
Politics is just status written large, really.
Hmm.
Yeah, what are your next moves?
Or what...
Let's check in.
What is on your research portfolio?
We have the wave, the flies, consciousness, like, how are you seeing these different threads merging and splitting right now?
Well, I think one important strand is to merge the wave consciousness idea with this model of language.
And I think a lot may come out of that.
I would like to sort of integrate this more with the FEP portfolio of ideas.
And if anybody is interested in doing an FEP, because this is...
I'm saying language is Bayesian inference.
And I'm saying that the wave is a Bayesian optimal model of our physical surroundings.
And so they're all very FEP compatible.
And I would like to do FEP implementation of it.
If somebody who's more expert than I am in FEP techniques would care to collaborate on it.
So I think those are important lines.
But integrating language and consciousness, I think, is very important.
Because a part I haven't talked about here is how we get conscious of language meanings.
And that all has to be done.
I think just mechanizing the model of pragmatics, producing computer implementation that does pragmatics, and demonstrating the steps of building up the common ground and so on.
That's an important topic.
So there's plenty going on.
Where would you say pheromonal symbolic communication would come into play in reference to the insect neuroanatomy or not?
Now I'm currently looking at insect brain anatomy in a very different way.
Because obviously they have language or anything like it.
They probably do have consciousness.
But what's happening on the insect brain with me at the moment is I'm just looking at the data on the fruit fly connectome and finding patterns, which I don't think have been seen before, groups of neurons that act together.
And I'm just looking at the data on the other, where I'm called partner neurons.
And this is just saying to me that there are things about brains in general, insect brains or vertebrate brains, which are just much more complicated than we think.
I'm beginning to think the old Macaulic-Pitts model of a neuron, where neurons are kind of simple adding machine.
Can't be the whole story, only a tiny part of the story.
And I think insect brains may help us because they're such, because they are smaller and more examinable.
They may help us explore that brains are really doing.
I think the neuron, if you think a neuron is just a Macaulic-Pitts neuron with Hebbian learning, that seems to me such a vastly oversimplified picture of what a neuron is, but it can't be right.
And that's what I'm trying to look at with the insect brains.
But that's a different topic, really.
Yeah.
Oh, well, yeah.
A lot of cool things with intracellular computation, dendritic trees.
And when you look at the morphology of some of these neurons, amazing in the insect brain.
But they do also have different songs.
Different?
Different?
Sometimes songs, like different stridulation.
Like language.
It's, what would you say that it has to be oral?
Or could it be sequential in it?
Or does it have to even be sequential, even something like Braille?
I mean, is the key aspect that is...
I think we should...
Yeah.
I think we should just restrict the word language to human language.
And we should use a different word, like signalling or something, for what animals do.
And insects certainly do signalling, but they've never had sexual selection for language ability.
Never had to show off their intelligence to other insects, I don't think.
Yeah.
What about sexual signalling with song and dance and nest construction?
Oh yeah.
There's a huge amount of that all over nature.
People, animals learn courting rituals and courting songs and so on and that.
But none of those, I think, have got to the state of human language of showing off.
Animals have to show off that they know the code.
They know how to dance or they know how to sing a certain pattern of songs.
But they don't have to show off that they're more intelligent.
They can compose these things using intelligence.
So I think that's the specific, the human thing which led to our oversized brains.
So what ways would you say people could get involved or contribute or just how do you take this from here?
Well, I'm hoping to do is get the pragmatics ideas more widely appreciated.
And if anybody wants to pick those up and do an FEP implementation of them or work with me on a general implementation, that would be great.
But I just want to get those ideas out there.
Because what I feel is that if I present the unified theory of language, that's too much to take in one bite.
And people will say, oh, well, there's too much there.
I haven't got time to read it.
Whereas if I can concentrate just on pragmatics, people might say, let's have a look at this.
Just want to get the ideas out there.
Yeah, I'll be really interested to see that.
And Elliot Murphy's work, Similarities and Differences, and Michael Walker and Hector Manrique
and their discussions of kind of the cognitive niche and the communicative niche that led to theory of mind type developments.
But you brought up many interesting areas.
And I mean, there's a lot to.
How can we wordlessly or wordfully integrate?
Let's just say that after this stream, we were going to reflect.
Do we always return to the same mindful attractor with generic cues to release or evade linguistic naming?
Or is there a way to set an orientation for, let's just say, material heard during a lecture that both points towards the content that was learned,
but also doesn't stay within a linguistic interior monologue rehearsal setting?
That's huge questions there.
I come back to mindfulness.
I think a big part of mindfulness is being mindful of the fact that you're not mindful, being aware of these patterns dragging on you.
And that, in a strange way, leads to more freedom from them.
But it's hugely difficult to summarize, especially in words.
Do you feel like any of this has to do with your name being Warden?
Well, it's an old Norman name.
It means guardian.
I don't think.
Very well.
Very well.
Thank you, Robert.
Looking forward to how this proceeds in exploring the insects and hearing more about consciousness at the symposium.
Great.
Many thanks, Dan.
See ya.
Bye.
See ya.
Bye.
See ya.

See ya.