## SNbfAkOokAI

SPEAKER_00:
Hello everybody.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

This is live stream number 29.0 on September 14th.

Is it September 14th?

Not anymore.

September 17th.

At least where we're at on September 17th, 2021.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is recorded in an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

At the short link on this slide, you can see the past, present, and future live streams.

And just to call your attention to the tabs on the bottom, the first tab are our regular Tuesday live streams.

So for these ones, we do the dot zero contextualizing video.

That's what you're watching now.

And then we have a dot one and a dot two, where on two successive weeks, we try to have the authors, try to have a lot of different people on a panel just talking about the paper.

The guest stream is sort of a wild card slash anything goes.

We have a lot of different topics.

Model streams reflect machine learning, different kinds of modeling and walkthroughs of code.

And the math stream is for talking about math and different formal frameworks.

So if you are interested in co-organizing or presenting for any of these different kinds of streams, then just get in touch with us.

Today in Actim stream 29, we're going to be

having the goal of learning and discussing this paper, Active Inference and Active Inference Framework for Ant Colony Behavior by Friedman, Shantz, Ramsted, Friston, and Constant.

And just like all of the other .Zero videos, this is just an introduction to some of the ideas.

It's not a review or a final word, and it doesn't change too much even when the first or any author is on the stream.

We're gonna go over the keywords as well as the aims and claims, the abstract, all the usual things that we cover in the .zeros.

And in the coming weeks, we're gonna be discussing this paper.

So everybody is welcome to join from whatever area they're excited about the paper from, just get in touch with us.

So we can begin with a little introductions and warmups.

Blue, how about you can go first and then we'll pass it to the first author.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm Blue Knight, an independent research consultant from New Mexico, and I'll pass to Daniel Friedman, the first author of this paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Blue.

So I'm Daniel.

I'm a postdoc researcher in California.

And yeah, usually we have everybody except for the first author introduce themselves.

And then the first author steps in and gives a little background on the paper.

So it's fun.

It's the first time that we've discussed one of my papers on the stream.

And we'll be talking about a bunch of different aspects of it.

And it's awesome to have you here, Blue, with

a lot of expertise in collective behavior and a bunch of other areas.

The big question that motivated not just this live stream, but this whole line of research and this paper is

Assuming that each agent, and there's a quote from the paper, assuming that each agent, nest mate, has only limited access to incoming information, how can a group of active inference agents solve complex group foraging problems?

So in the case of ants, that local information is gonna be the pheromone density, the chemicals that it can perceive, it's local umwelt.

But in the case of information foraging,

It's what we see, or it's our perspective, or the people who we can communicate to.

And so this is a topic that's come up in many different guises, which is, again, when you have a multi-agent system,

Using active inference to model each agents, how do we think about the way that the perceptions and cognition and action of each individual active inference agents, how do those compose or interact so that the group can have adaptive or interesting behavior?

The big question of the paper and also, again, just a big open question, hardly one that gets answered in its finished form by the paper or by this discussion.

Anything you want to add?


SPEAKER_01:
Only that I was really excited to... Actually, I picked this paper and I've been kind of pressuring Daniel to do it for a little while, maybe three months or so since I first read it.

So I picked this paper because...

Complex behavior, complex group foraging problems, it's really linked to my interest in collective intelligence and in scaling intelligence, which is also why I'm drawn to active inference.

So I'm just curious to see your insight into ants and the deeper, like, you know, when we see a paper, we see only the surface, the final product.

And so it's really going to be fun to take a deep dive into the little nuanced things that kind of maybe led you to the

the birth of this paper.


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

visual with sort of what's on the surface and what's beneath the surface.

And in fact, foraging is such a fun task to study, not to get ahead of ourself, but it's one of the few tasks of the ant colony that you can see outside.

You just stand next to the nest entrance, just like this picture, which is taken while I was doing field work in Arizona.

So there, where all the ants are coming in and out of, this is the nest entrance.

And so this species, the red harvester ant, Pogonomyrmex barbatus,

It's like there are ants coming in and out doing some trash work, midden work, but mostly what you see on the outside is foraging.

And so what happens underneath?

Well, here's this painted ant with the three yellow dots.

So we can take a little tracer down underneath and we can see what is happening beneath the surface of the foraging.

The paper is Active Inference and Active Inference Framework for Ant Colony Behavior.

And we read the authors previously.

It was a really awesome collaboration.

So thanks a lot to Alec, Maxwell, Carl, and Axel, who each brought really important insights here.

Two of the main aims and claims, and then Blue, you can provide any thoughts.

In this paper, we develop and implement a Bayesian simulation model derived from the Active Inference Framework that captures some of the underlying dynamics and emergent phenomena of ant colony foraging behavior.

That's what we did.

And the second point is...

By integrating the Bayesian ant colony perspective of Hunt and others with stigmergic regulation and the scale-free formalism of active inference, Fields and Glazebrook 2020, we provide an integrated framework for behavioral, ecological, and evolutionary modeling in ants.

Such an integrated approach could facilitate the transfer of modeling insights from ant colonies to human design systems, and I guess back.


SPEAKER_01:
So cool aims and claims.

They weren't very forthcoming with or you guys weren't very forthcoming with the aims and claims of the paper.

But I found like lots of them like nested like little gems in the paper.

So this is just a couple of them.

But I think that this paper was very, you know, on the bleeding edge, we say instead of like the leading edge, cutting into some some novel areas and making some new connections that we haven't seen before, or at least I haven't seen before.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

There's what we did, which is write a simulation based upon theoretical grounding.

And then there's the fields that were integrated, which was a sort of Bayesian forager multi-agent perspective.

stigmergy which we'll talk about soon and of course active inference and that is going to hopefully develop the field of ant research and other areas that stand to learn from either the bayesian multi-agent perspective stigmergy or active inference so that is quite a large swath do you want to read the first part of the abstract


SPEAKER_01:
Sure.

In this paper, we introduce an active inference model of ant colony foraging behavior and implement the model in a series of in silico experiments.

Active inference is a multi-scale approach to behavioral modeling that is being applied across settings in theoretical biology and ethology.

The ant colony is a classic case system in the function of distributed systems in terms of stigmergic decision-making and information sharing.


SPEAKER_00:
The second half of the abstract is...

Here we specify and simulate a Markov decision process model for ant colony foraging.

We investigate a well-known paradigm from laboratory ant colony behavioral experiments, the alternating T maze paradigm, to illustrate the ability of the model to recover basic colony phenomena such as trail formation after food location discovery.

We conclude by outlining how the active inference ant colony foraging behavioral model can be extended and situated within a nested multi-scale framework and systems approaches to biology more generally.

How, from that abstract, do we forage ahead?

That's why we have a roadmap.

First, in the introduction section, we talk about Bayesian multiscale modeling and StigmaG, and then introduce the need and basis of an active inference model of the ant colony.

method section we talk about the foraging task specifically which is the alternating t maze but that's really just a map it's kind of like minecraft or simcity like you can specify any kind of map you want we used an alternating t maze for a few reasons and then we talk about the active inference model for ant colony foraging specifically

We present some results and we didn't have any live ants recordings in this paper.

So the results are more like schematic.

They suggest what kinds of things can be measured and be discussed for multi-agent active inference systems, specifically the colonies foraging performance and swarm coherence metrics.

then in the discussion we talk about three scales of analysis and implication for the work which is at the nestmate the colony and the population scale and we use those words intentionally because they're all ants someone says oh there's an ant on my windowsill and they mean a little six-legged nestmate but

If the colony is the organism, then wouldn't the ant be the colony?

And just, it's a piece of ant tissue on your windowsill.

And then we end with a concluding remark.

So it's a relatively sparse roadmap, but maybe we don't need that many signposts to get where we're going.

Any roadmap comments?


SPEAKER_01:
No, good.

Let's forage ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly, exactly.

The keywords were ants, foraging, just why even continue?

Ants, foraging, active infants.

Oh yes, that's right.

Behavioral modeling, collective behavior, evo, eco, devo, or eco, evo, devo, different people order it differently, and stigmergy.

So these are going to be keywords that open many doors.

So let's go into them.

We'll start with sort of the grand Gaia-level keyword, which is EcoEvoDevo.

That's just how I say it, but we might have done EvoEcoDevo in the paper.

EcoEvoDevo stands for Ecology, Evolution, and Development.

So this is one way to see it with these three interacting domains.

So it's like a tri-disciplinary or a transdisciplinary approach that is going to, just like the name would have you believe, just like action and inference come together in active inference, EvoDevo is going to integrate across these three fields.

So what's happening as organisms develop in their ecosystem and how evolution shapes that.

But it's also, and this is drawn from the Gilbert et al.

paper, and a good text to read on it is the Abohif et al.

2014 paper.

It's actually a historical lineage.

So those who study the history of evolutionary theory might be familiar, for example, with the modern synthesis of evolutionary biology.

which happened in the first half of the 1900s and integrated, for example, population genetics and quantitative genetics with evolution.

Well, here's a cool timeline from the Gilbert paper talking about how from the 1800s with Darwin, as well as antecedents,

moved through sequence of really important developments after the first half of the 1900s.

So these are post-1950s, post the discovery or elucidation of the structure of the DNA molecule.

Things like symbiosis, the way that microbial interactions shape developments.

A lot of cool things.

And on the bottom here, growing awareness of beneficial symbiosis.

So eco evo devo is referring to a historical lineage that is becoming increasingly recognized as an important integrative take on the systems that we're a part of.

What would you have to say about eco evo?


SPEAKER_01:
Just that it's constantly, I mean, we're becoming so much more aware of the different facets that go into eco, evo, devo and how interconnected and fundamentally important they are in a triad.

So it's like for me, the clear like I remember being at the neuroscience meeting and I don't remember the name of the professor, but she was a toxicologist from Johns Hopkins and had been working in her field for, I don't know, like 30 years.

And this is like when they're doing the microbiome sequencing, which was maybe like 20 years.

12, 2013, somewhere around there.

And so they're doing like the massive microbiome sequencing.

And she got up and said, you know, we're going to have to redo all of the toxicology work that I've done my entire life, which it just was so overwhelming and devastating.

it just really blew my mind to hear such a renowned professor stand up and say, you know, we don't know what's toxic and what's not because we've not considered the whole.

And so in relation to toxicity and ecology and evolution and development, like we consider developing, like, you know, of course we consider children eating lead paint and so forth.

And I think we're, you know, we've looked at evolution, but really that this, the ecology of our own survival is something I think that people are just starting to become more aware of and attuned to.


SPEAKER_00:
And there's a famous quote in biology by Dobzhansky, nothing in life makes sense except in the light of evolution.

It's like, but doesn't nothing make sense except in the light of development and ecology and physics and so on.

So it's kind of like, right, we should have integrative frameworks, whatever their English titles are, so that we can understand all the light that's being cast on the phenomena that we care about.


SPEAKER_01:
And I'm reminded of the holobiont too that Chris Fields brought up, right?

All of that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, absolutely.

What are some of the ways that we can think about the phenomena we care about?

Well, one of the big keywords here is collective behavior.

That's one of the keywords of the paper.

So here's a Lewis Thomas quote.

It is in our collective behavior that we are most mysterious.

Individuals are collective too.

Hashtag we were never individuals.

and

Here's a nice map from Wikipedia of complex systems.

Some of the key terms, a little fractal with complex systems and complexity itself.

And then like a palette with the art, we have the different key terms like systems theory and evolution.

And then here's collective behavior up here.

So collective behavior is one of the fundamental pillars of complexity because collective behavior is just studying

systems interacting.

What do you think about that, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
I want to say it in the next slide.


SPEAKER_00:
Sounds good.

What is the difference between collective behavior and collective intelligence?


SPEAKER_01:
Right.

And so this is something that, you know, we've talked about offline, but really like when you look at collective behavior and collective intelligence, and this was just a map I also pulled from Wikipedia's definition of collective intelligence.

And so here, I mean, this is clearly, you know, framed in a human situation, or is it?

Do ants have open source software?

Maybe we can talk about that.

But collective intelligence, it's these three branches framed in this image.

It's coordination and cooperation, which both of those come into the collective behavior play.

When I think about fish schooling or birds flocking, this is like a behavior that we behave and coordinate to behave collectively.

for each other's mutual benefit and for the benefit of the flock or the school or whatever.

But the only thing that's left out in this triad is cognition.

And so

Like what is cognition?

Is that input output or is cognition intelligence or what's the difference between cognition and intelligence?

So for me, there's like a very blurry boundary between what is collective behavior and what is collective intelligence.

And so, I mean, we've also talked offline.

And so I just wanna know, you know, my thoughts on this are evolving.

And I'm curious as to maybe people that are listening to this or maybe anybody that wants to come onto our next live stream and talk about it, like if they have strong opinions on collective behavior versus collective intelligence.

But I'd like to hear if you have any, you know, overwhelming thoughts.


SPEAKER_00:
It's definitely two different perspectives on intelligence and behavior.

There's sort of like...

Some who would say that intelligent behavior, it's defined by its outcome and it doesn't matter what's happening internally.

And then there's sort of the possibility that intelligence could exist in the absence of behavior.

Now frameworks like we discussed in Livestream 28 with mental action, with mental and cognitive processes as themselves being action,

and being modeled as action in active inference framework that sort of blurs the distinction but definitely that's going to be a question like is collective behavior the same thing as collective intelligence is intelligence simply behavior and then something i always wondered about with collective behavior oh well you know collective behavior groups of people okay but aren't people groups of cells so

If collective doesn't mean anything as opposed to individual, then we're just talking about phenomena or behavior.

So let's drop the adjectives that don't really matter.

So what are we signaling when we're talking about collective behavior as opposed to saying, yeah, I'm talking about individual groups, individual crowds of humans, for example.


SPEAKER_01:
I definitely think that, you know, there's definitely, if you could have no, you could have intelligence without behavior, of course, because babies can't do anything but like lay there in bed and like observe, you know, like they just, you know, can suck their fingers or something.

But there's some intelligence there that doesn't have necessarily an associated action and a tremendous amount of intelligence because they're learning and, you know, building their own model of the world.

And so what is collective?

And I was listening to the internalism, externalism live stream, like number 5.2 for anybody who wants to go back in time and revisit that with me.

I was listening to that last night and it's like, what is the preferred level of analysis, right?

Like from the noble paper, like where do we get this preferential level diagnostic?

And we are as individuals, collectives, collections of human and other types of cells.

So what is this collective behavior versus collective intelligence?

I don't know.

It's something that's always mushy to me.


SPEAKER_00:
There's a Kantian perspective on that for another time.

One way that we can talk about a specific type of collective behavior is by introducing this topic of stigmergy.

So sometimes when people talk about collective behavior, in the first slide of their talk, they'll say, you know, flocks of birds, and here's a group of people walking through a landscape.

And those are examples of coordination amongst agents.

But stigmergy is actually pointing out a really specific and important different type of collective behavior.

So here's from the Wikipedia describing that Stigma G was introduced by a termite biologist, Pierre-Paul Grasse, in the 1950s.

So it's a recent term, but of course people have seen this phenomenon before.

And he defined it as...

Stimulation of workers by the performance they have achieved.

No, not performance-based benefits for jobs, but more deriving from the words mark, stigma, and ergon, or work, like an erg, a unit of work.

It captures the notion that an agent's actions leave signs in the environment and signs that it and other agents can sense, which determine and insight their subsequent actions.

So here we're not just looking at sort of interactions amongst subunits of the birds looking at each other or the school of fish, but actually the modification of the environment through the actions of the agents and then the ways that the environmental conditions modify how the agents behave.

So here is like the agents in feedback with the environment.

And what Grasset was looking at was how termites, how one termite would pick up a little clot of dirt and then put it somewhere probabilistically.

And then that would change the likelihood that it picks up or puts down certain other pieces of dirt later.

And so you could imagine like one termite building a nest by itself or many happening at the same time.

maybe even moving pieces of dirt in the same way.

So stigmurgy is actually a mechanism by which extended cognition occurs and by which cognitive processes can be scaled, not just by increasing the bandwidth or the type of interactions laterally amongst agents, but actually by externalizing the work to marks on the environment.

And in the paper it was written, here we present the first active inference type model of StigmaG and the first active inference model focusing on insect behavior.

So think about that.

There's been a lot of navigation work in active inference, but when the mouse is moving through the T maze, for example, or when the eyes are scanning over the piece of text, which are active inference models that we've seen, they don't leave traces.

even when there's multi-agent active inference simulations, the interactions have been lateral and the environment has been taken as fixed.

So that's why we brought EcoEvo in because now we're thinking about the way that agents are in feedback with their environments and each other and how StigmaRG as a topic reflects that.

This is pretty cool.

You added this second slide on StigmaRG, so what does it show?


SPEAKER_01:
I did.

So this is another, just an image that I pulled off of Wikipedia.

And it's taken from, this is someone's PhD thesis, Stigmurgic Collaboration, A Theoretical Framework for Mass Collaboration.

And again, it shows here coordination, cooperation, and collaboration as opposed to cognition in this collective activity or collective behavior model.

And one of the things that I just really thought was cool to point out was on the right side under collaboration.

Okay.

So collaboration is distinguished by co-created emergent shared representation, which manifests as creativity.

I thought that was super interesting because creativity implies novelty in some way to me.

It implies either a new use or developing something that's entirely new, making new connections, as well as co-created emergent shared representations result in divergent production and evaluation.

So how does this co-created emergent shared representation result in divergence?

I thought that this was just, it was an interesting figure and all these different like components and end results are just an interesting way to think about stigmergy.

And like, can we go through our environment without a trace?

Like we've all seen like murder mysteries or like, I mean, how hard is it actually to not leave a trace in the environment behind you?

Even if it's hairs or fingerprints or whatever it might be.

So none of us is without this leaving a mark on the environment.

And how does stigmergy contribute to human niche construction, which we're incredibly adept at?

And how do we learn from that, the traces that are left by others?


SPEAKER_00:
We certainly stigmergically generated this presentation because I also drew from the 2006 work of Mark Elliott.

And

Elliot wrote, many questions arise when confronted with the streamlined efficacy and apparent lack of organization and motivation of these new global enterprises like Wikipedia and others that were being mentioned in 2006.

Not the least of which, how does this work?

Stigmurgic collaboration provides a hypothesis as to how the collaborative process can jump from being untenable with numbers above 25 towards becoming a new driver in global society with numbers well over 25,000.

pre-blockchain, pre-Bitcoin, pre-whatever it is that we're going through now.

But these four tenants from 2006 really say a lot, which just like Blue's image reflected, collaboration depends on communication and communication happens in networks.

So that's kind of collective behavior 101.

That's something that you'd see in the flock of birds or the school of fish.

Collaboration is inherently composed of two components, without either of which collaboration cannot take place, social negotiation and creative output.

If there aren't lateral social interactions, there isn't an interacting group, and without the creative output, then the productivity is low.

So maybe systems like that can be designed, but probably not that interesting or important.

This is for humans.

Collaboration in small groups, 2 to 25, rely upon social negotiation to evolve and guide its process and creative output.

So that's like the startup model or the small team model.

However, Elliot's proposal is that collaboration in large groups, 25 to however many, is dependent upon stigmergy.

You need to have, if you're gonna have 25 or more people in a meeting and it's an hour meeting, it's like everybody can be taking notes on a shared document.

Everybody can be editing the wiki.

Everybody can be typing in the chat.

But if people are talking linearly, each person's gonna only be able to speak for two minutes on average.

So just think about how that scales up.

If you had a thousand people working on a project, each person's only gonna be able to speak for a few seconds per hour.

So what are the mechanisms by which instead of just lateral ephemeral interactions,

amongst agents, how can we modify a single source of truth, in a sense, so that productivity can actually occur?

And it's important to note that it's not that social negotiation doesn't take place when we're doing stigmergy in big groups.

So it's not like Wikipedia editors aren't aware of each other as social entities.

It's just that, as Elliot wrote, negotiation takes a backseat in terms of the creative drafting process.

Most, if not all, stigmergic wiki collaborations have discussions associated with the content being developed, but it's possible to contribute to Wikipedia.org, for instance, without discussing what you're contributing to or creating.

So that's kind of a cool insight.

Anything else to add on stigma to you?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Just the group size is super interesting because we are like I'm writing a paper on central place foraging right now, actually, like an unrelated paper.

But it's interesting, this large groups of humans, because like we're looking at hunter gatherer societies and the formation of camps and like what did human society kind of look like way back?

And really the estimate that's pretty agreed upon in the field is, you know, 500 people in a camp.

which is like, you know, it's like 100 families of five is like the upper limit.

And like, you know, mostly like at least maybe 250 people for a camp to maintain, right?

For it to stay cohesive, for it to stay bound together.

And I think it's interesting because what was the stigmergic process back in like the hunter-gatherer foraging days?

Like, what did that look like?

It's just interesting to wonder about and think about if it's dependent on stigmergy.

I mean, like now I think about we stack rocks,

Like if you're marking a trail, like everybody's been out hiking and you see these rock stacks.

It's like, what are those?

Like when you first start seeing them and then you see that they're trail markers and I don't have to know, like no one told me that rocks are stacked there to mark the trail, but it's like, this is a clearly human signature.

Nobody else stacks rocks up.

That's weird, right?

And so you see these stigmatic like things that are just left as traces in the environment that could be used to guide like large groups of humans across time even.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and even in the definition of stigmergy, we saw marks and signs.

So semiotics and biosemiotics comes into play.

Let's get to the ants and potatoes.

The eusocial insects.

Eusocial is a cool word.

We're not gonna go too much into the difference of what is eusocial versus other social forms.

But some of the exemplar eusocial insects are ants.

All of the around 15,000 ant species in the world are eusocial.

So they all live in colonies.

There's no solitary ants.

And they live in colonies where there's

You could call it a reproductive division of labor.

Also honeybees are eusocial with the queen and worker distinction.

and termites are as well.

Most bees are not eusocial, so honeybees are a bit of an outlier in that respect, and just like there are eusocial wasps, not all wasps are eusocial.

And there's sort of six images here because I want to show that there's some related species, like ants and bees and wasps are Hymenoptera, that's an order of insects, but termites are in a totally different order, more closely related to cockroaches.

And eusocial insects are able to accomplish tremendous feats of stigmergy and niche modification.

Here's a leafcutter ant colony being excavated by tiny little humans.

Big colony.

Here's a beehive with honey and the cells and the amazing geometry that they can construct or that they can work with once constructed by humans.

And also very large nests for termites.

So eusocial insects are really cool.

How do they do what they do?

Well, I wanted to pull from a few slides from my PhD work, which was on ants.

So these are just some fun slides about ants.

And if you want to ever jump in blue, then go for it.

But this was from some early work that was in the middle school age range talking to people about ants.

So one of the first things about ants is there's no leader.

On the left side, we see the, without getting into sex and gender politics, there are female reproductives called queens usually.

Again, a whole nother topic, why and should they be called queens?

There are males who are sometimes called drones.

They don't play as active a role in the day-to-day tasks of the colony.

And then there are sterile females, which we call worker nest mates.

And the image on the right shows the queen laying eggs.

are being nursed intended to by the nurse task group of workers so she can just the queen can just pump out eggs and the nurses are taking care of it and they're also feeding the queen and then you have foragers outside of the nest making decisions for themselves so there's no bluetooth there's no long-range communication there's no hive mind need we just have independent agents making decisions for themselves locally and there's no leader ant

How do they do that?

How does it work without a leader?

The way it works is that individual ants make probabilistic decisions about behavior based upon the rate and type of interactions they receive.

So here we can start with just this ant on the top left.

And it's walking along and it starts encountering a high rate of trash.

And so it thinks or acts as if it thinks, I should start picking up trash.

Maybe the next one I see, I'm more likely to pick up.

encounters a piece of trash, can identify that by the scent, picks it up and can continue walking until it encounters another scent, maybe the midden pile where there's a bunch of trash piled up, walks along for some more time before it doesn't encounter any more trash and then reverts to a more generally poised state.

So this can be modified with a drift diffusion model or response threshold model.

There's a lot of mathematical models of how different rate and type of interactions

probabilistically can update behavioral tendencies, but this is just a general way that we can look at how different ant behaviors play out.

We can always ask what is the individual interacting with and how are they responding to that interaction?

Well, how do you go from just responding to interactions to adaptive behavior?

The nature and what the adaptive behavior looks like is going to depend on the ecology.

Again, eco evo devo.

So here we see two possible ecologies of food.

On the left is a colony where food is found sparsely, but in very clumpy piles.

This is like a picnic in the Argentine ants.

In this case, it makes sense that there would be a trail that might get laid down that helps direct nest mates to the location where another nest mate previously found the food.

However, there's also ants that are looking for food sources that might be mobile, like looking for live prey or maybe just scattered dead prey, but like just dead insects in the desert, bringing them back.

And in those cases, you're not any more likely to find food where another nest mate found it.

And so in that situation, you see a lot more independent foraging activity and you don't see a pheromone trail.

So just because we're talking about pheromones, there's a lot of different kinds of pheromones.

There's nest marking and queen pheromones and larval pheromones.

It's not just trail pheromones and they're not just making these kinds of nests, though there are ecologies that favor these types of collective algorithms.

And then across ecologies,

there's this lose it to find it component, which is the balance in the sense between explore and exploit or between pragmatic and epistemic values and goals, which we talk about in active inference, because if every single ant were to follow the pheromone trail,

then they could exploit locally, but they would have a challenge discovering new food resources, whereas if none of the ants followed the pheromone trail, then it wouldn't be informative, and so it'd be a totally different game as well.

So there's this balance between following...

the traces that have been made before and going off and discovering new resources.

So that applies to seed foraging and also information foraging, which is kind of a parallel that we'll be looking at again and again.

So those four pithy little statements, there's no leader.

It's about the response to interactions and the way it looks depends on the ecology, the interactions with the ecology.

and that across tasks there's this lose it to find it balance between explore and exploit those capture a lot of the dynamics of ants the life cycle of an individual queen is that she is also born as an egg and develops into usually a winged fertile form that's called a gyne like a princess

She will mate with males and found a colony, but there's other lifestyles, for example, that don't require mating with males or in which case the queen doesn't found a colony by herself, but rather breaks off with some workers.

There's a lot of diversity in the ant life cycles, but once the queen is installed in the colony, she pretty much just is fed and lays eggs.

Many of them, dozens to thousands or millions, depending on the species.

The other sexual type of ants is the male.

The male lives to breed.

They have a larval development where they're tended to by extant nurses.

And then males, usually a little bit leaner and meaner, they try to have sex.

They sometimes succeed and then they die.

So they only live for an adult phase that's very, very short.

So these are the two kinds of sexual ants, the female and the male, queen and the male.

But what we see when we're looking at ants out there in the wild is usually the workers.

So workers start their life by being born as eggs, and they have a different developmental trajectory than the queen, even though they're both diploid females in most cases.

and they can live for months to years depending on the species.

And there's a process called temporal polyethism by which a worker, once it's born, the first tasks that it performs are inside of the nest and it performs nursing work.

So it's like as if right after being born, the first thing you did right there in the neonatal unit was take care of other babies.

That's kind of like how the ants work.

When they're a middle-aged ant, they tend to be doing nest work like architecture and trash cleanup.

And then in their elder worker phase, they do foraging, which is the most dangerous task as well as the most water loss in certain ecologies.

So this is temporal polyethism.

So it's not that ants are born into being a nurse or born into being a forager.

All the workers progress through a stereotypical sequence of tasks.

In fact, that progression through a stereotypical sequence of tasks by the workers, as well as the fact that workers and queens are both from the same genome, in many cases, a diploid female genome, is what has led many to propose to use social insects as emerging models for behavioral epigenetics.

So we know that they display fascinating individual and collective behaviors, as well as niche modification in Stigma G.

ants also display behavioral plasticity they can learn and they have memory they can also integrate senses like vision and olfaction and vibration and again this is arising in the context of similar or even identical genetic backgrounds because there are clonal ants so here's waddington's epigenetic landscape showing how this developmental ball

depending on how it bifurcates epigenetically, can lead to different developmental outcomes.

Like this first bifurcation is, are you going to go the fertile route with developed ovaries and a different kind of thorax and wings?

Or

Well, you go the sterile route, at which point about 85% of ants have what are called monomorphic workers.

Whereas the minority of ants have what are called polymorphic workers.

Like there's two discreetly different or more types of workers, like majors and minors.

So a lot could be said on this, of course.

Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Can I just ask a quick question?

So I see like flying ants around all the time.

I'm not seeing like queens, but are there like species of ants that fly also?


SPEAKER_00:
There aren't flying workers.

There aren't flying workers.

But during mating flights, you will see flying ants.

And those are guides and drones flying around looking to mate, especially in the Southwest US where you are.


SPEAKER_01:
Got it.

Okay.

So that makes sense that I see flying ants.

I'm not crazy.

Like they are ants that are flying.

Okay.

Just checking.


SPEAKER_00:
People have used many different approaches to study

how ants work and how it is the case that you end up getting all these different behaviors out of the same genome.

One of the approaches that's been taken is just not looking at any of the molecular details, but purely investigating from a behavioral ecological approach.

And some of the critical work here has been done by my PhD advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon.

And so she has looked for many years at the relationship between the statistical regularities of the environment

and the adaptiveness of different distributed algorithms.

So in environments that have, as we talked about earlier, like spread out food resources, you wouldn't expect to see pheromone trails forming.

Whereas if the food resources are distributed like this, you would expect to see that.

And another example is if it's expensive to forage,

then it's going to be in a default off mode until it's stimulated.

Whereas if it's cheap to forage and maybe even expensive to allow that territory to be taken by a different species, you'd expect to see like an on until disruption mode.

And these search algorithms are not just idle playthings of myrmecologists.

They've been proposed to be a bridge between organisms, evolution, and ecology, bridging the search algorithms that exist on the internet, on computers, with the kinds of search algorithms that natural systems use.

Because wouldn't it be interesting if we could have adaptive search algorithms that make all the trade-offs and succeed that species do?

And this is an awesome paper by Michelle Lenon.

kind of like a meta analysis across ants studying the characteristics of their environmental niche and then also their foraging strategy.

So this is a great work to compliment some of Professor Gordon's work.

Behavioral ecology, again, is just looking at behavior and ecology together.

So we haven't talked about anything molecular, but indeed people have studied molecular components of this from 2016 and well beyond.

We can use evolutionary genomics to investigate some of the genetic underpinnings of ant behavior.

Evolutionary genomics gives us the toolkits to compare genomes across species.

So we can look at species that have behavior A versus B and ask if there are gene families that expand or contract in those species.

So that's about the composition of the genome, like what genes are present or not, conserved or unconserved gene families and sequence changes in the genome.

There's also transcriptomics.

So that's gene expression analysis, where we can look at the same tissue or different tissues and how gene expression is differing between the male and females, as well as between the reproductive and the sterile females.

we can use transcriptomics to investigate the differences between nest mates.

So a common experimental protocol is, for example, to collect the brain or the antenna from the nurses versus the foragers, and then ask about how gene expression changes are associated with differences in behavior.

And tissue specificity is really important.

You can't just blend up an ant and then say something about how tissues are expressing genes.

And then also most recently, there's been some of the techniques developed in other species like fruit flies, RNA interference, which is like a way to knock down the expression of a certain gene.

And the first gene modifications in ants were published in 2017 with the mutants are here.

and right now there have only been like knock out which is easier to do than knock in experiments but the future of ant genome editing will be quite interesting so these are using genetic and epigenetic and transcriptomic tools to study ant behavior another approach that relies on neither behavioral ecology or genetics although of course it's related to them is studying physiology

So in physiology, we're interested in similar types of questions.

How are species similar and different?

How are the reproductive and steriles of females similar and different?

How are the different sterile nest mates similar and different?

And one of the most common approaches here has been to study the concentration of molecules in the brain, like neurotransmitters, dopamine, serotonin, which are common in us as well, as well as some neurotransmitters that are trace amines in humans, but really important for invertebrate neurophysiological function like octopamine and tyramine.

And there's been a relatively epic history of drugging ants in the lab, going back to at least the 70s, giving them opioids, hallucinogens, stimulants, THC, all kinds of drugs.

And more recently, some of the first works where we've been able to provide ants with drugs in the field.

And this is a phylogenetic perspective by Kami et al, looking at which neurotransmitters have been investigated across which ant species.

So it's pretty sparse.

So we don't have a total picture, but that's why we do evolutionary biology.

So we can study how the same molecules in species A, B, and C play a role.

And then maybe we can have a good hypothesis about how it might work for species D.


SPEAKER_01:
So clearly I have no background in ant species neurotransmission, but I do know quite a bit about neurotransmitters and I'm curious, I haven't read the paper, but are the use of different neurotransmitters species specific in ants or do they all pretty much use the same neurotransmitters to do the same things?


SPEAKER_00:
They have the same neurotransmitters, but species might utilize them differently.

And that would be the whole cool thing to study.

Let's talk about the ant brain.

So on the right side is a pogo head.

And this is what the dissected brain looks like.

It's zoomed in.

The brain at the same scale as the head is very small.

So ants in their head have a lot of muscle for their jaw and a lot of glandular tissue.

And so the brain is taking up a relatively small fraction of the head.

Let's see if this video will play.

Okay, I don't think the video is going to play, but Sasha has made some very beautiful immunohistochemical images of three-dimensional ant brains.

On the left side, we have just one half of an ant brain, a picture that Sasha took, and it's juxtaposed next to a 2014 paper that developed a new ontology for the brain regions of the invertebrate brain.

because invertebrate neuroscience was a very discordant field.

In different species, people would have different names for clearly homologous brain regions.

And so this paper in 2014 brought a lot of clarity to the field because it gave us standard nomenclature for talking about different brain regions.

So although the invertebrate brain uses a lot of the same chemicals and families of neuropeptides that are used in the vertebrate brain, it's not organized like the vertebrate brain.

So there isn't like a brainstem and a limbic system and a prefrontal cortex.

There are different brain regions.

So just to kind of name a few.

here's like the optic nerve coming into the optic lobe so the eye is like this sort of curved area that sends signals into the optic lobe and then similarly the antennal nerve comes up from this side and projects into these kind of grape looking clusters into the olfactory lobe so the layout is very different but there are some functional and computational analogies to vertebrate brains

And then this area up on the top is called the mushroom body.

The middle is called the central complex.

And the mushroom body is known to play a very important role in route memory.

For example, the work in Cataclyphus, which is another type of desert ant.

So different brain regions have identified functions.

And what's cool about the invert and the ant brain is we can almost like

visualize the whole thing at once because it's small.

Some neural changes have been found to be associated with the bio behavior of foragers.

So for example, a lot of hormones that have been associated with foraging activity in solitary insects, as well as hunger activity in humans,

have been found to be differentially expressed in foragers.

So although they're not foraging for themselves, they're foraging for the colony, it turns out there are some extremely deeply conserved neural circuits and peptides related to hunger, neuropeptide Y, which is I think called neuropeptide FF in humans.

There's changes in gene expression, which again are found analogously in solitary insects like fruit fly, as well as unsurprisingly in humans.

Some of these questions about regulating hunger and about how the perception, the interoception of hunger is linked to foraging activity, like get up and do something if you're hungry, these are deeply conserved beyond ants, even beyond invertebrates and invertebrates.

And then,

just like so many other behaviors have been found to be the case, changes in the biogenic amine neurotransmitters in their signaling properties and metabolism have been established in invertebrates.

So these are like tyrosine and dopamine over here, serotonin, octopamine, and then the enzymes that are kind of like the freeways between the neurotransmitters that transform them into each other, synthesizing and degrading.

differences in the expression of these enzymes which we determine with transcriptomics can influence the levels so we can use some technologies like hplc or gcms to measure the amount of neurotransmitters in the brain and then we can do gene expression analysis to look at the receptors and at the metabolic enzymes as well why does it all matter

because a forager doesn't know how much food the colony needs.

It doesn't have a dashboard telling it how many seeds there are or how many larvae need to be fed or how much food is out there.

And so it is faced with this go, no go decision, stay home or forage, which is influenced by environmental features that it may not have total awareness of.

That decision

is much like the decision that, for example, an investor might face with looking at even when they have total information or partial information, you have to make some sort of decision.

So foraging would be easy if you knew where the seeds were and you knew exactly when to go and you never made a bad decision.

And that's like sort of buy low, sell high.

Like if you knew what the price would do, then

trading would be really simple, but the whole question is about decision-making under uncertainty, not under certainty.

And so that is the question, to forage or not to forage.

And that distinction will come up again and again.

Anything on that, Blue?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so since you didn't specifically go into foraging, I know we've talked offline about different strategies that ants use for foraging and it's a common interest that we have.

And so ants are central place foragers for the most part with a nest.

But you've given, you know, where they go out, central place foraging, just in case people don't know, is that they leave the nest, they go get food, and then they bring it back and share the resources with the people that are living in the nest.

And you told me about ants that use other kinds of strategies.

Like, you've told me about the feed-as-you-go ants that don't have a nest.

But are they also central place foragers?

Or do ants ever use other strategies for foraging other than that strategy?


SPEAKER_00:
There are polydomous ants, so they have multiple nests and they will, so that's not center place because they have multiple places they're bringing it back to.

There's ants like army ants that, I guess it could be considered central place, but it's a moving central place.

Nomadic.

Yes, exactly.

So lots of kinds of foraging behavior.

Finally, we get to active inference, which is an integrative framework for studying perception and action of different systems.

This is what was written in the paper.

Active inference is a Bayesian theory of behavior that accounts for perception, learning, decision-making, and the selection of contextually appropriate actions, all of which are cast as a form of approximate Bayesian or variational inference.

In this framework, perception is modeled as the formation of posterior state estimates.

Learning is cast as the process of updating of priors, as well as other parameters, and decision-making and action are processes that compare the evidence for various models about future states and observations under possible courses of action.

So we're going to continue this thread of having a unified framework for perception and action

And we're going to apply that to the ant system.

Anything on active inference here?

Every week, what could we say?

So much to say about active inference.

And the last keyword before we get into the paper more specifically is the behavioral modeling word.

So here was from the paper describing how active inference is related to behavioral modeling.

Active inference framework naturally lends itself to modeling behavior of different systems across scales.

Generally, what changes across models available in the literature are agent action affordances, so what can be done by the agent, visual scanning versus physical movement, the semantics of the prior beliefs, so what are the belief distributions over, and the hyperparameterization, the prior distribution over beliefs, like are those fixed or are those learned?

the point of view of the dynamics i.e the message passing and update equations all active inference models are the same and so we've seen all kinds of behavioral modeling frameworks and while many people have sort of agreed that there's like an input output structure there's some sort of events from the outside world that

go to the system of interest to the agent, whether it's a computer program or an animal, and behavior outputs.

That's kind of where the agreement stops.

There's many, many different ways to carry out behavioral modeling and totally discordant simulation approaches.

So one of the aims of bringing active inference to bear here is that we could actually have a framework that not just integrates the perception and action stages,

but puts in the ability to specify arbitrary generative models in between that cognitive sandwich and look at the patterns across different systems and different scales because they would be looking exactly the same from a model outline perspective.

So.


SPEAKER_01:
Just to tack onto that, like one of the beautiful things about active inference is it contextualizes the interaction between the agent and the environment.

So there is no,

behavioral modeling, like behavior doesn't take place in a vacuum, right?

And so one of the beautiful things about active inference is that it's always, you know, considering like, well, how does this plant grow?

And it's like, well, that plant grows depending on how much sun there is and how much water there is.

And so there's always this perception action loop when considering behavior, which is just, I think, probably one of the greatest things about the framework.


SPEAKER_00:
here's the um paper that we started on that we ended up modifying to introduce stigmergy to it's a paper the acquisition of culturally patterned attention styles under active inference so at first glance it's like wait it's it's literally a paper about cultural styles of creating pottery designs so here's like what the pottery designs look like

there's um it's kind of black and white art on pottery and then the eye can see a local set of cells so like the focal point and the immediate periphery and motifs are visually detected by looking just at pottery and so different kinds of patterns can be inferred by the visual scanning over pottery patterns and so

In the quest to resolve a culturally informed uncertainty, we have these scanning paths over motifs.

So here it's like the motif was just like this white line.

It's like the eyes moved across and it was like, hey, I'm kind of curious, is it going to be a motif that looks like a Tetris piece?

Scan up.

Oh, no.

Okay.

then the scanning happens like that whereas other motifs have different scanning paths so that's going to be a lot like the foraging paths that we're going to be looking at but there's a few questions that we want to consider like how is visual scanning similar and different to ant foraging

Or in other words, how does epistemic foraging as well as pragmatic foraging differ when you have skin in the game or exoskeleton in the game?

You have to move your body.

Visually, you can scan and then go back and then scan and go back, and you haven't left a mark on your environment.

So it's a foraging task,

but it's not stigmergic because your vision doesn't modify the object of vision.

And so there's these similarities and differences between physical foraging and visual foraging.

And then there's the question about how these visual and bodily foraging phenomena are similar or different than conceptual or informational foraging.

So foraging is kind of this concept that links all these different pieces from an animal physically moving on a landscape to our sensory modalities like vision, scanning a landscape to informational landscapes and their similarities and differences across these.

So we'll look at some of the figures and formalisms, the code and so on.

Figure one has a layout of the map and the model.

And so the map looks like a T. At the bottom of the T is the nest.

So this is like the point where the ants emanate out of when they start foraging.

And then when they return, that's the end point of their foraging trip.

And in the classical tea maze paradigm, food is placed on one of the arms of the T, like the left or the right arm.

In this case, we used an alternating tea base paradigm.

So the food would be on one end of the tea for some period of time, and then it would switch to the other side of the tea.

So this is the foraging task that we set up, but this is just a map.

You could make it look like a labyrinth or it could look like anything.

In the simulation, what happens is the ants start at their nest and then they implement a model which we'll look more at soon.

But the ants action affordances are movement.

It can move in any of the directions that are surrounding it.

So a future model could have ant inertia or it could only move forward to the sides like a pond or something like that in chess.

could rotate but we didn't keep track of the ants orientation we just said the cell is about as big as an ant and they can move to any of the adjacent cells and the ants able to perceive and act in those local that local environment

And then we use the following to parameterize the model.

So here we go.

A little bit blurry, but there's a generative model, which is just like in any other active inference model.

It's a generative model of outcomes and hidden states.

Here, the outcomes are the perceived pheromone and the hidden states are the true concentrations that are being inferred of the pheromone.

The factors that go into

the Markov decision process that's happening inside of each ant are its prior over hidden states, the A matrix, which maps from the hidden state to the outcome, the B matrix, which is describing how hidden states change through time, and then policy, which is suggested here to be influencing the transition between different states and the free energy minimization, which dictates policy selection.

And then we discretized the pheromone into 10 categories.

So there was 10 possible concentrations of pheromone in this model.

So that's kind of setup of the model is food is going to be placed and alternating between these two sides of the maze.

Ants are going to leave the nest and diffuse around with no preference for a direction.

except when they find a seed, they're gonna start depositing pheromone on their return journey.

And then they have a preference for walking towards regions of increased pheromone

And it'll be shown that that is actually enough to recapitulate some of the most interesting behavior of ants, like the ability to form a trail to food.

And just one interesting piece that differentiates the active inference model from traditional reinforcement or reinforcement driven notions of foraging is in those models, the reward would be the seed at the end, the food itself, and that the cues

would be the pheromone trail along the way the pheromone trail would be seen as like a means to an end and the seed would be like the goal but in active inference the reward in other words what the preference is over is actually over pheromone density and the seed is seen not as a reward but rather a semiotic cue to switch strategies

So active inference really inverts the situation by making the reward about the moment to moment decision making of the ant and then sees what is traditionally seen as a reward, the food itself, as actually just a cue to switch behavioral strategies.

So that's one of the most interesting things that we figured out.


SPEAKER_01:
So can I just comment in here really quick?

Just that this switching task teamies is like, it's a very simplified version of the switching bandit problem.

So we discussed the multi-arm switching bandit back, I guess it was maybe 23.

I don't know if you recall which live stream it was, 25 maybe.

But it was back, I think, before the summer.

So...

so maybe 25 or 23.

So that, that live stream talks more about like a stationary bandit problem and a switching bandit problem, but it had multi arms, like I think eight arms and here there's only, there's only two, but I just wanted to draw the parallel between the two kinds of simulations.


SPEAKER_00:
I just looked it up.

It was 24 with empirical evaluation of active inference in multi-armed bandits.

This is a two-armed bandit.

It's a two-armed teammates, but you can imagine the different switching dynamics or different number of arms.

So it absolutely is related to that.

Let's go into a little bit more detail on the formalism and the model itself.

So here is describing the process of variational inference.

And specifically, there's a Q variational distribution that's being fit as a function of the policy.

And it's looking at the hidden variables, the pheromone density, from the beginning of time to a given time step.

and of policy.

So those are the kind of the pieces that inference is being done over.

And then there's a generative model of the outcomes, the hidden states, and the policies.

So that's what the agent is doing variational inference on.

And that model doesn't need to be jointly considered all by all.

It can be factorized, which makes it very tractable to compute.

And then given the factorization, there can be a free energy minimization such that actions are selected based upon

the optimization of this variational distribution in a way that it's selecting policies that are expected to minimize the free energy.

So that's in the appendix.

And these are some of the formalisms and it is minimizing the difference between the Q variational distribution, hidden states at time T given policy

the difference between that variational distribution and this P distribution, the actual empirical distribution, which is over outcomes states also conditioned on policy.

So there's, again, so much to say about the active inference formalism, but really importantly,

the calculations are conditioned on policy.

So it's like, we don't need to calculate the exact momentum or trajectory of the car.

We need to pick a policy condition on what affordances we have.

And so that in a way simplifies and sidesteps a lot of the questions about wanting to describe the world to the highest possible degree of precision, because actually what we want precision on is our policy selection.

So that's one key difference is that conditioning on policy.

And then this ability to do variational inference on a simplified and factorized representational distribution Q, and then minimize the divergence, the expectation of the divergence, between the Q distribution and the empirical P distribution, including outcomes.

So those are some of the pieces of active inference that help make it a really scalable and tractable framework.

Here's the figure in the...

appendix so we talked about the markov decision process and what some of these variables mean but here is like the center point right with this is where the ant is located at a given time

And then what it can perceive and its action affordances as well are the adjacent squares.

So just like in the visual scanning model, the eye could perceive the center point and the adjacent cells, here it's pretty much the same code actually that describes how even though there is a computational

object there's a variable that describes the actual pheromone density across the whole map just like there was an actual computational variable that described the whole pattern of the pottery

we're able to use a remapping matrix that zeroes out all of the other cells that aren't the adjacents.

So that is what ensures that each agent is actually doing a purely local decision-making.

So we kind of take a per agent approach to masking such that it's action and action

perception are constrained to only its local neighborhood.

So that could be changed.

You could have ants that are aware of 10 cells around them, but only act within one cell.

And those are the kinds of extensions to the model that could be done.

But we constrained perception of pheromone and action to just adjacencies.


SPEAKER_01:
So this is one thing that, like, I wish you guys would have played with.

Because what I would like to see is, like, okay, is there something in my immediate proximity?

Like, I read, like, in the likelihood remapping, if there's nothing in the immediate proximity, then the ant moves around in accordance with Brownian motion as opposed to moving towards the pheromone.

And, like, I would like to see just an extra step of code.

If there's nothing in the 9, let's look in the 25 and move towards the thing with the highest pheromone.

Like, that's one, like, because, okay...

It's like a, just a more distal, like, well, like a trace of a scent or something like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, it could be done.

It could be done by modifying the code.

So here's Alex GitHub and just look, Alex chance and ants.

Yeah.

Probably a coincidence that it's in his name, the last few letters, but you really never know these days.

And the main pieces of code to look at are ants.py, Python.

That's the main script, ants.py.

Config.py has a lot of the parameters.

So if you want to explore having just two ants in the nest or 5 million ants in the nest,

you can just change a parameter in the config file.

And then when the ants.py is run, it's going to like look at the config file to run.

And then figure one, two, and three are just for reproducibility to exactly reproduce the figures in the paper.

Let's talk about the pseudocode.

So we can maybe go over the code during one of the dot one and the dot two, but this is from the paper.

To summarize the computational activity of each forager at each time code, pseudocode is provided here.

See the code for full details.

The active inference model as implemented here does not presuppose or imply any specific neurocognitive architecture for any specific ant species.

I believe that was some reviewers comments about what this did or didn't say about what was happening inside of each ant.

and again that's why it's so fun to talk about active inference and these broader philosophical questions while realizing that actually we're just looking at how sensory information comes in and what actions come out and the internal generative model can be a hypothesis that's informed by cognitive architecture but in fact it isn't that cognitive architecture it's kind of like black box modeling but then we can go into the box and start building sub boxes and hypotheses about what is inside but

We don't need to presuppose any specific cognitive architecture.

And in this case, the ant has no memory and no anticipation.

So it's like kind of like a one step, make a move towards the pheromone.

It's not predicting or remembering what's happened.

But what happens at each time step is it's like, you know, for each ant.

First, the ant perceives the local environment.

That's the pheromone density.

It then updates or optimizes its beliefs about pheromone density with respect to the variational free energy.

It then, after updating its distributional beliefs about pheromone density, updates its belief about action.

So relatively, given the affordances moving in different directions, update my beliefs about how different action policies will relate to expected free energy.

So it's like, let's just say there was a pheromone above, but not as much below.

That would be perceived in step one and updated in step two.

And then it'd be like, well, moving up,

will, I can expect to be more like in my preferred state than if I were to move down.

And then action is sampled based upon the relative proportions of the relative free energies of the different action affordances.

So that action is sampled from that belief distribution, action selection, and then the agent performs movement.

And

In the case of it carrying a seed, so having already found the seed, it deposits pheromone.

Otherwise, it doesn't deposit pheromone on the way out.

There are ants that sometimes deposit pheromones both ways, but we were studying the sort of simplified case where the ant only puts down pheromone on the way home.


SPEAKER_01:
So can I comment really quick on the neurocognitive architecture?

So again, after listening to the internalism, externalism live stream 5.2, I believe it was, somebody asked that question.

And Maxwell gave this great answer, which I thought was really cool.

Like, OK, so where in the brain is the generative model in this internalism, externalism debate?

And that's something that we see with the visual cortex mapping, et cetera.

So where's the generative model?

And Maxwell's answer was really cool.

Like when you go to machine learning and you don't like look inside the computer for the generative model, like where's the print of the generative model?

It's like software, it's just running.

So I always think that that's a really neat, and sorry Maxwell if I really paraphrased you horribly because I may have, but there's no need for the model to be necessarily inside the brain mapping to some specific brain region.

It can just be software that's just running.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Figure 2 showed an example trace of just a simulation.

So the food starts off and has not been discovered yet.

So like the density is low and it sort of starts here, pure, no pheromone.

Then it's kind of follows like a zigzag and you can see like the food was on the right side.

And so there was a pheromone trail that was forming down to the nest, starting up on the top right with the food.

And then it switches to the left side.

And so there starts to be pheromone laid down going towards the left arm.

But what's reinforced is still the trunk because that part is like good to have high density on no matter what.

And so that was our simulation.

This was a colony with 70 nest mates, over 2000 time steps with three switches of the food location.

And...

We didn't optimize the parameters or try to like find the best performing set or it was really just to show that this phenomena of a pheromone trail leading to food that can loosely track location of food changing due to the natural decay

the pheromone so informationally this decay rate can be thought of as environmental perturbation or drift that counteracts the reinforcing effects of stigmatic convergence or stigmatic tightening

were just like this is the first pass model that displays that phenomena and it could be optimized to explore how it works differently what if one arm is longer or all these different pieces but this is kind of what the model outputs and then in the supplemental videos there's a lot of videos there's some some large file size gifs of

You can see the ants themselves diffusing around.

Then once there starts to be a trail, they start to like really start taking advantage of it.

One of the pieces that was most exciting to think about was how do we measure foraging performance?

And this speaks to a common question.

area in studying collective behavior which is like how do we think about the relationship between individual level behavior and group behavior again we know that as we talked about earlier like the individuals are groups and so on but just looking at a two-level model where we have like agents and then the collective

What are the difference between individual and colony level traits?

So colony level phenotypes, also that's why we use nestmate and colony level so that we don't have to use individual or group because nestmate is always just gonna be nestmate, colony means colony.

Colony-level phenotypes are summary measurements of emergent properties in that phenotypes do not apply to separate nest mates, but they're enacted by nest mates.

And these are good citations to check out.

For example, each nest mate has bodily phenotypes, like the width of its head.

Every nest mate has a head width or has a mid-gut gene expression profile.

but colony phenotypes are those that only exist at the colony level.

So there's only one measurement of those per colony, like the total foraging performance or the average inter-nestmate distance or the sex ratio of larva.

So which sex each larva is, is nestmate level, but this larval sex ratio only gets one measurement per colony.

And so we looked at two measures of colony foraging.

the number of foraging trips round trip completed through time, and a swarm coherence metric.

So this is just the amount of foraging trips completed through time, showing how as a function of the number of nest mates in the colony, you get different dynamics.

So for example, 70 ants finds it faster, the first return trip happens before the 500 time steps, finds it faster,

and ends up getting more, but potentially not, you know, multiple times as more.

So there's like some sort of a scaling relationship between the number of nest mates and the performance.

And then like look at 10, like it finds a few seeds, this blue line, but then it kind of flattens out.

So maybe the pheromone trail that the first few brought home just dissipates.

So then none of the other ones are really able to latch onto that trail.

So it has a very qualitatively different shape than the other ones.

And then this is the swarm distance coefficient, which is like the average distance between the nest mates.

And so just interesting that, again, it could change.

Maybe if you run it for more time steps or you have it in a different structure than the teammates, but it's almost like the distance increases as the ants spread out.

And then there's almost like a stationarity effect.

where the average distance stays relatively similar.

So these are just a few examples of the kind, because you have in the simulation, at least, you have full information on the location of every nestmate.

So if you want to do an individual nestmate level phenotype, you can calculate that trivially.

But then also there's this question about how do you summarize collective foraging performance?

So any thoughts on that?


SPEAKER_01:
So the choice to have full information on the location of every nestmate is an interesting one.

And also like, I wonder if it's a parameter that you guys tweaked or played with at all.

Like what if you just have knowledge of half of the nestmate locations?


SPEAKER_00:
Like you could almost simulate being a behavioral ecologist, the grad school simulator, where it's like the computer is simulating a hundred nestmates, but then you can only see 10 of them.


SPEAKER_01:
Or each ant can only see 10 of them.

So we have full knowledge or the ants have full knowledge.

So that was the question that I have.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, here we as simulators have the total trace of the simulation.

And one important piece that is not included in this was like interactions among nest mates.

They just passed right through each other.

in this simulation.

So that's definitely not too realistic.

And in nature, the way that ants know whether they're heading inbound or outbound, they can look at the polarization of the sun, their step integration and the memory, there's visual scene recognition.

And then there's also importantly interactions with other nest mates on the trail.

Like if you're bumping into nest mates carrying food, you're probably heading out.

And if you're holding food, bumping into empty mandibled nest mates, you're probably heading in.

And so they can combine all these kinds of sensory information to determine a lot more information than the kind of drift model that we instituted here.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, and it just reminded me of this model that we just built with this foraging paper that I'm part of.

And in that model, all the foragers know the location of all of the food a priori, right?

Like, so they already know where all the food is.

So, so, but learning where the food is, is really like a whole different model, right?

Like going to get the food and modeling interactions, like, you know, network formation in foraging patterns is different than learning where the food is, how we learn from others, this collective like learning.

And that's something maybe that's the difference between intelligence and behavior.

Like you can just follow what other people do.

That's maybe behavioral, but, but like learning from others based on different cues and so forth.

I mean, that, that's a,

That's maybe an intelligence metric.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's return to this broader question about stigmergy as a type of niche modification and how it plays a role in extended cognition.

So this is some...

Nice writing by Axel, probably, and referring to some of his work.

The representation of the environment leveraged to solve the teammate's problem, i.e.

the map, is not the one entertained by nestmate brains, but rather the one that is carved out of the environment and leveraged implicitly by each ant as they each forage alone together as a colony, leaving cues that nestmates can use adaptively.

So I like that kind of like collective behavior as being alone together,

like each nesme is perceiving its own umwelt, its own local environment is all it perceives, yet the way that the colony approaches this problem is truly collective as well as truly stigmergic.

In active inference terms, the ants are endowed with only an extended generative model.

An extended generative model is one where some of the model parameters are encoded

not by the agent engaging in inference itself, but by the physical environment in which it lives.

So that's kind of like a person maybe can have a few numbers in memory, but now imagine if you're hearing a string of numbers and you're writing them down and then you're able to go back and interact or somebody else could have written the numbers down, you're going back and your generative model is functionally

including things that are now part of the environment, like they're outside of you.

So that really speaks to this integrating internalism and externalism.

And it brings up big questions like what other kinds of systems, whether they're currently modeled not in the collective behavior framework or whether they're being modeled as collective behavior, but not as stigmatic collective behavior, what other systems can be modeled with stigmatic active inference algorithms?

And then what kind of individual level, nestmate level behavioral heuristics contribute to adaptive collective behavior?

in the context of what kind of statistical regularities in the niche or regimes of stigmergy.

Because it's not like stigmergy equals adaptive.

You could imagine the switching teammates where they reinforce it too rapidly and then it is inflexible as the food changes location.

So it's not like, oh, collective behavior equals it's going to be adaptive or stigmergy equals adaptive.

there's actually probably only certain combinations of parameters, certain regions of parameter space in which specific environmental regularities can be capitalized upon.


SPEAKER_01:
So the idea that the ants are only endowed with the extended generative model in the environment, and I know that in the paper they mentioned that memory is something that could be played with, but I'm reminded of the story of Hansel and Gretel.

So where Hansel leaves a trail of breadcrumbs behind them so that they can find their way back home, or a trail of pebbles the first time that were not eaten.

So you leave the trail of pebbles, it's like modification of the environment, but if you...

can just remember the way, right?

Like that's an interesting dynamic between knowledge gained from environmental cues versus knowledge that's inherent and retained.

And I know maybe you have maybe more to say about ants and ant memory and where maybe these memories or...

if there's some genetic memory for ants in different species or in maybe even in just single colony, right?

Like you've talked to me before about colony foraging behavior and even in the same species, the foraging behavior is different.

And so I'm curious as to your thoughts on you.

We don't have to go in right now, maybe for next week, but your thoughts on on ant memory and how that may come to play.


SPEAKER_00:
an interesting question i think species where the foragers head out alone for longer distances and need to find uh pieces of prey and bring them back we'd expect them to have higher memory whereas the extreme case of just the pheromone follower you know pheromone respecter ant

Maybe there's a very limited role for memory.

And then the question empirically would be, are there morphological differences in their brain?

Is the mushroom body smaller?

Are there certain genes that have differential expression patterns?

How do nurses and forager

differ in the expression of those genes.

Like maybe nurses don't need to have as much spatial memory, but foragers do need spatial memory or step integration.

For example, it's been shown in multiple species that nurses don't have a circadian rhythm.

They are just sort of low key working and chilling 24 hours a day.

Whereas foragers have a circadian rhythm that's strongly in tuned by the light cycle.

So how does memory sort of start?

And then how does the temporal polyethism and the trajectory of what the nestmate needs to do for the colony

How does that lead to the development of nestmate level cognition?

And then how have the regularities of the niche selected for colonies that succeed by virtue of being composed of certain kinds of nestmates that have certain kinds of memory?

This returns us to Stigmergy.

So what was cool about this


SPEAKER_01:
I just thought it was cool.

I mean, I'm always looking for, you know, intelligence and behavior and how these two are linked together.

But this paper, which I found like self-published on Amazon, but I think it's part of a proceedings.

Anyway, it was just like a neat kind of like Google find.

It says Stigmergy, an intelligence metric for emergent distributed behaviors.

And I'll just read this little piece of it.

It says the complexity of aggregated behavior often depends on Stigmergy.

Stigma G occurs when behaviors by individuals modify the environment while being regulated by the environment state.

Stigma G has generally been studied for the forward problem, predicting the consequences of local behaviors.

It is also applicable to the backward problem.

Synthesizing Local Behaviors to Fulfill a Global Need.

The concept provides an objective measure of intelligence for natural and synthetic systems.

A system's intelligence is measured by its amount of effective stigmaty.

It not only adapts to a changing environment, but also modifies the environment to suit the system's needs and goals.

So I thought that this was just kind of a neat, refreshing perspective on a lot of the things we've been talking about today.


SPEAKER_00:
I agree.

Intelligence is often thought of as just being like inside of a brain or in one agent when we know that that doesn't take the brain body into account, doesn't take the social into account.

And then even then, that's where this paper came in was, okay, so then even social cognition, let's say you integrate brain and body as well as the social, you're still just seeing this floating mob

type simulation how do we talk about the way that interacting agents modify their environment how that updates their tendencies that's where stigma g comes into play and that's why it was an important thing to do


SPEAKER_01:
But, and we're increasingly seeing the links drawn between cultural evolution and collective intelligence.

Because as a species, I mean, we're still obviously not discovering fire and learning how to make buildings, right?

Like we already know how to do that.

That's why we're not like living in these camps anymore.

And so we've evolved and none of our ancestors knew how to use an iPhone, but maybe in nine generations, none of our, what are they called?

Successors?

That's what it is.

None of our successors will also know how to use an iPhone.

So it's just us right now, but everything that we do, we're leaving these stigmatic traces behind in our environment that enables us as a species to evolve or become more intelligent for better or for worse.

Anyway, big questions.

So there's some big questions for next week that I'll give you to think about.

Are you here?

So what is the relationship between collective behavior and collective intelligence?

And I'd love to have other people's takes on this.

What are other possible measures of group synergy or colony synergy?

How are colony level metrics retained in ants over time?

In this model, forgetfulness is critical.

So do you think that the ability to forget is as important as memory in human or ant behavior?

Is StigmaG a measure of intelligence or behavior or both maybe?

And then does trust play a role in eusocial insect synergy?

And I have some more, but I thought that that was a good start.


SPEAKER_00:
All great questions.

Yeah, I think I got some dot one questions.

I got some dot two questions, got some dot three questions, but this is an open line of research.

The paper was published only this year in 2021.

So if this is something where you think, oh, I have a theoretical contribution or I study archeology and I wanna learn how StigmaG might relate to those kinds of models or, oh, I'm way better at coding than this and I could make dot, dot, dot, dot, dot improvement on the code.

let's do it so these will be fun things to discuss blue thanks for all the help on the dot zero in this fun conversation we hope to see many of you on the dot one and dot two in the coming weeks on the 21st and on the 28th and tucker in the chat wrote

Would love to hear and learn more about memory in collective systems.

Totally agree.

And when we think of like the von Neumann computer architecture, it's like, where's memory?

It's like, I mean, there's two spots where it can be, right?

It can be in the hard drive, long-term storage, or it can be in RAM, short-term storage.

And then that has even percolated into how we think about short and long-term memory in organisms.

But now what about the niche modification?

What does it look like and how do we think about it?

Is it simply that like data A is in short term and data B is moved to the environment?

Or is something modified about the environment and something modified about the internal generative models such that the information could be recapitulated only through interaction with the environment?

How would we think about memory in that case?

And that's also...

why ant colony optimization and swarm computation are part of the broader umbrella of unconventional computing architectures because they do challenge or move beyond some of the sort of classical notions of memory, processing, bandwidth, clock speed.

We didn't have to talk about that, but those are things that studying natural systems makes us wonder about.

Fun times blue.


SPEAKER_01:
See you soon.


SPEAKER_00:
See you later.

See everyone next week.

Bye.

## Z0fpX5Lpp0Y

SPEAKER_00:
Looks good.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab live stream number 29.1.

Today is September 21st, 2021.

And we are going to be discussing this paper, Active Inference and Active Inference Framework for Ant Colony Behavior.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so we can improve our work.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at all of these social media links, and all backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We will be following good video etiquette for life.

Here at the short link, you can find all of our upcoming live streams that are planned.

And if you want to get in touch or if you want to participate, please reach out to us and we will invite you to participate in a panel.

Today, our goal is to learn and discuss this paper, Active Inference, an active inference framework for ant colony behavior.

We will be maybe going through some of the aims and claims, keywords, figures, and

having a discussion around this paper.

So just to start off, we will go around and introduce ourselves and then start off with some warm up questions.

So my name is Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant from New Mexico, and I will pass it to Mark.


SPEAKER_03:
So, hi, my name is Marco.

I'm located in Vienna, Austria.

I'm a postdoctoral fellow at the Conrad Lawrence Institute for Cognition Research.

And my interest is very much from the clinical perspective.

I have to do with DBS patients and have come across active inference actually rather recently.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California.

And as first author, I'm happy to maybe just introduce the big picture.

Do you want to just briefly say hello, and then I'll return?

Stephen, are you?


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, you're muted, Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Hi there.

So did you just introduce me?

Hi, Stephen here.

Nice to be on.

And I am based in Toronto.

And I work with communities and work with spatial sense making around different issues and how active inference can now help to understand those processes of sense making and dynamic inference in the modern world.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

So Daniel, do you want to maybe introduce the paper or give us a summary of what was your big takeaway message from this paper?

What was your motivation behind the work?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, just hearing some of the backgrounds of those here, ranging from human, medical and clinical to sort of social and collective processes playing out in humans, it just shows that we each approach active inference from our own experience.

So personally, my background was in genetics and insect behavioral ecology.

And so it was conversations and reading the papers of especially Axel and, of course, Carl Friston.

And we were having conversations about, well, where does active inference fit into discussions about collective intelligence?

Where does active inference fit into bigger discussions about evolutionary theory?

Like if active inference can be an integrative framework,

for different social systems, for different human systems, why not other animals too?

And so there we were at the intersection of curious about big questions in evolutionary theory, which I know we'll return to today, and specific questions about the areas that I was researching at the time, which was the regulation of foraging and decision-making in ants,

And so it was conversations with Axel and Maxwell to a large extent where we started thinking, how could we modify the types of models that we currently have in active inference and bring that into something that adequately at least starts to work towards capturing how the ants do it?

And Alec did.

had worked on the code of many active inference projects.

And so that was quite a fun process.

Maybe we can also talk about like interfacing between ants and computer science.

And we mainly wanted to navigate a little bit towards the bigger questions in biology, but do so by really tackling a specific scenario that would then lend itself to unique explanations and predictions and models.

And the specific contribution that differentiates the active inference model from other active inference models is first that it's in insects and ants, but also importantly that it's stigmergic.

So it's modeling explicitly the feedback between the environments.

and the agents, whereas there had been sort of multi-agent active inference simulations where the agents communicated with each other or they had a shared theory of mind.

Those types of models existed, but this was the first time that one of the action affordances of the agents included the capacity to modify the environment and the status of the environment modified the likelihood of the agent taking different kinds of actions.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

So I just want to reach out to Marco and Steven and just ask, what's something that you were excited to talk about today or something that you liked or remembered about the paper?

Either of you have thoughts?


SPEAKER_03:
Should I start?

Sure.

So one thing, as I already mentioned before, is the role of dopamine, which I find super interesting.

And you mentioned in the paper that the foragers have higher levels of dopamine.

So I was wondering about the role of that and how that influences affordances and what the individual and also the level above, like the colony, does with that.

So is there a specific role for dopamine for the colony as a whole?


SPEAKER_00:
Great question.

And we wrote it down on slide 14.

So we'll definitely return to talking about some of the molecular roles of dopamine.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And Stephen, do you have any thoughts?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I suppose mine's a bit more of a broad question, but I'd be really curious about that balance between sort of specific things relating to ants and how that relates to things like dopamine and maybe the broader process of like the design thinking and working through this kind of active inference framework, just how that was useful.

to think about how things may relate to their environment.

So I suppose the process of creating the model as well as what the model was and what it found out about things in the world.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
It's a great point, almost asking about how do we study the biomimicry, not of just materials like light materials or strong materials, but of collective algorithms.

And we can't really study the success or the attributes of a collective behavioral algorithm outside of its ecological niche.

And so a very long and important branch of research by my PhD advisor, Professor Deborah Gordon, which is where I was when we were doing a lot of this initial work.

She studied for 30 plus years, understanding how the statistical regularities of the niche

were then associated with which collective behavioral algorithms of ants we saw happening.

And so there's like 15,000 ant species there on every piece of land, except for basically Antarctica, which is kind of where they should be if you think about it.

If you want to have a framework for ant behavior that includes the desert and the jungle and all these types of different environments, it's sort of baked in this idea of appropriate generalization.

Because we definitely can't have a theory for each ant species.

So we need to look a little bit bigger than that.

yet we don't want to have just an ant specific theory only and let's you know think about termites and bees and non-insects so what is the appropriate level of generalization and how are we going to generalize the study of collective behavioral algorithms and how they interface with different kinds of environments

While also remembering that, you know, we got to have our eyes on the ground.

We need to be explaining those ants.

We can't just simply spiral off into the abstractions about collective behavior.

So the ants are a cool system because they remind us about ecological and behavioral diversity and the need to generalize.

But also there is a real system that we can actually see.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks, Daniel.

I was wondering how much that generalizability that is in the field that you're in with your supervisor, you know, that might be something that really brings something to the table for active inference.

And I'll be curious as well, you know, how much those algorithms that have been worked on for a number of years, either got modified or ported or had to be kind of reconceptualized from the ground up, you know, that'd be interesting.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool, Daniel, you have a response?


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So one reason why active inference is able to swap in to where other theories or frameworks have been used before is because at the core, it's an input output structure, just like a lot of other behavioral studies, like sensory information comes in, something happens, and then action comes out.

So in that way, it's able to map onto a lot of other ways that people have thought about animal behavior or ethology.

One of the differences in active inference is that we're not committed to any specific cognitive model.

So like in this paper, we just use pretty much the most simple possible cognitive model, if you could even call it that.

It was one step decision making.

There was no memory, there was no anticipation, there was no capacity to use some of the sensory affordances that we know that ants actually have and use in nature, like multiple scents, interactions with nest mates, interactions with other physical objects.

We mapped onto this input-output structure, but we know that we can generalize it later.

That's one reason why active inference will hopefully play a nice generalizing role there.

I hope, yeah, go ahead, Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's really cool.

And I suppose one thing that when you mentioned that, I suppose this even ties in with that dopamine question, but I'm not sure because I'm not as familiar with that, but is by not having it all based on the cognitive, it's showing what the niche can do for you in a way.

It's like how much, you know, we all assume it's all going on in the head, which is the old way of thinking, but

with the active influence, it's like, well, maybe there's other ways that we can get where we need to get, so to speak.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
And with the ants, it was almost never a question of it happening inside the head only because it's not to demean their cognition.

It's just very clear that no single forager would know how many seeds does the colony have?

How many does it need through time?

What's the weather and the trade-offs of foraging?

Where are the seeds?

I mean, those are questions that at a first pass we know are just unknowable.

And so it's pretty clear that the way that individual nest mates are making decisions has to have a radically different mode than, for example, let's wait till we have all the information and then make the well-rationed decision based on our simulation.

It's just not happening.

And then once you see that lens on ants, you go, huh, well, maybe there's some other way

swarming settings where the agents don't have total information.

And even if they did, it wouldn't be obvious what to do.

Like we can all imagine a chess board.

We have total information about where the pieces are, but even experts in chess don't necessarily know the best move.

And there might not even be necessarily one perfect best move.

So it really moves us into a setting of thinking about how action is undertaken, including action that can be epistemic, like gaining knowledge amidst uncertainty, rather than waiting till we've resolved our uncertainty, because then what?

We still wouldn't know what to do.


SPEAKER_05:
Cool.

That leads in pretty nicely to one of the questions that I had brought up last week.

So there are these colony level metrics, right?

Like how many seeds are

in the nest, or how many nurse maids are there relative to infants, or foragers relative to baby ants, or I guess they're infant ants, infants?

So how are these colony level metrics retained in a colony?


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

You asked a why question in a sense.

So it makes me think about the Tinbergen's four whys, which we've spoken about on other live streams.

But the evolutionary why is just colonies that have certain colony level attributes are more likely to succeed.

And so we end up seeing the emergence of certain

ratios of male to female nest mates or certain ratios of forager to nurse performance just by virtue of their survival so that's sort of an evolutionary circularity just like in active inference we talk about how the systems are resisting dissipation so systems that are doing it it sort of explains itself they're here and we observe them because they're resisting dissipation

And it's really this question about colony level phenotypes that fascinates people who study collective behavior, because there's the traits that a nestmate has, which are not so different than the traits that any other insect has, like six legs, what's the width of the head, what's the gene expression of the gland or the midgut, like what digestive enzymes are they making?

Those are things you can measure about one nestmate.

And so the body plan

in ants is really quite similar to all insects.

But then there's this really qualitatively different level of organization with a colony.

And how do those phenotypes arise?

How are those colony level phenotypes in feedback with nest mate?

How does selection shape those phenotypes?


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

Thanks for your answer.

And there's a couple.

So maybe let's go to the

this slide that shows where you're measuring the colony level metrics or the coherence, right?

Like the colony coherence, or I forget the term that was used.

But you have the model, or maybe we should start with the model, really.

I guess so.

So maybe do you want to just give us like a quick overview now of like the model and the point of it and... Yep.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's go to slide 15.

And so just to bridge from the colony phenotypes back to the specifics of the model, it's sort of like if there was a music festival,

there's all kinds of phenotypes of the individual participants, like their self-report, where did they move?

How is their decision-making being influenced by their sensory stimuli?

But then there would be certain descriptions that you'd only have one of for the whole music festival.

Like what is the average distance of people?

So that's what we were studying with the swarm coherence metric, but it just points that there's going to be two different,

Totally different types of phenotypes.

Some can be measured multiple times within a colony per nestmate, and other times there's going to be phenotypes that are only arising at the level of the colony, like the sex ratio or the average distance.

And what our model did was we specified the process by which the nest mates basically perceived and acted.

So it was an action and perception model at the nest mate level.

we didn't explicitly have an input or an output for the colony.

Not that it couldn't be done.

You could also think about where that might come into play, maybe in DOT2.

But we looked at a setting that has been used to study colony decision-making

And then we specified a nestmate level model and put it in this context where people had already been using it to study the dynamics of how colonies make decisions.

So here it's called the T maze test.

And there's two arms to the T maze, the two red arrows on the left side here of figure 1A.

And food is on one side of the T maze and it can either be static or it can be switching.

And this is something that they use in lab rat experiments as well.

So the colonies task is to basically get food.

But what we did is we didn't actually encode that as like a colony level goal.

We really went down to the nestmate level and we specified the

just like any other active inference model, what are the sensory observations made by nest mates, which in this case was just the pheromone density of the squares around them.

What are the action affordances of each nestmate, which is sort of, it can move in any of the adjacent squares.

And then what's the generative model, which entails a preferences and a free energy minimization happening inside the nestmate at each time point.

So that given the observations at a certain time,

the actions are selected.

And in this case, the preference was for more of the pheromone.

So like the pheromone can be interpreted as a attractant, something that the ant pursues or prefers to observe.

And, um,

The only other tweak, which is what introduced the pheromone in the first place and the whole concept of StigmaG, was that on the way in, after they've touched the seed, but not before, they also deposit pheromone.

So that was an additional action affordance to deploy pheromone.

And there wasn't any decision making about that.

It was just if you've already touched the seed, then you lay down the pheromone.

And if not, you don't.

And so it's sort of like those simple rules pursue regions of higher pheromone density, lay down pheromone if you've touched a seed, but not if you haven't.

Those two rules at the nestmate level recapitulate some of the phenotypic dynamics of colony decision-making.

So that's why it's fun to think about, like maybe we can look at complex collective phenomena and

and then understand how they emerge from simple interactions among agents and agents in their environment.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Just a quick question is, I'd be interested, because you've got, say, one ant that goes off foraging type of thing, and then maybe you've got the second one that follows, and then I suppose there's what goes back to...

the nest, if I'm right.

Yeah, I was just wondering how much more complex, or does it help to have more in the modeling, or does it make it more challenging to start using too many ants?


SPEAKER_00:
So we templated the natural history, if you will, of this off of a formica ant species, like a wood ant.

So it's referenced in the paper.

this dynamic of like, go out without leaving pheromone, come back with pheromone.

So given that natural history to change the number of ants from two to 2000 to 2 million, it's just a number in the config file when you run the code.

So it actually is not challenging to scale the colony's size

it might burden your computer or cause some other limitations.

And it certainly will change the collective outcomes, maybe in a linear or maybe in a nonlinear way, like we explored in the figure three.

But

There are so many natural histories and ways that ants forage.

Like there's tandem running or like an ant remembers where the food is.

And then it does like a leapfrog and it takes an uninitiated ant nestmate and leaves it.

And then when those two return, they bring back four.

And then there's eight.

So there's all kinds of recruitment and food localization strategies in ants, which is why it's important that there's not just like one single way that ants forage because they're looking for things that have different regularities in the environment.

So within a natural history, the script is written in a way where it's pretty easy to change the map shape or to change the number of ants or their appearance dynamics.

And then a little bit of the challenge would be like to adapt it or transpose it to a different natural history or to add multiple interacting pheromones or other kinds of things like interactions amongst the ants.


SPEAKER_04:
Marko?


SPEAKER_03:
Sorry, I just wanted to ask about the model as it is described in the paper.

Because at the beginning, the ants have basically random movements, right?

Because all the surrounding step movement opportunities are the same probability, right?

So is it sort of like a Brownian motion until the first ant discovers the food source and then starts altering the environment by the pheromone placement?


SPEAKER_00:
That's exactly right.

And there's seven supplemental videos, GIFs, where it's shown.

And what it kind of looks like on this T-Maze, it looks like you see these little particles that start swelling and diffusing up from the bottom.

So that's a total Brownian walk because there's no preference for direction when there's no pheromone deposited.

And then

You see one ant find the seed and then it starts laying down this pheromone, but it's also diffusing randomly because at least initially there's also no preference for direction.

But then you can imagine that there starts being a higher concentration of pheromone on the side with food than not.

And eventually that gets reinforced because it starts to attract anyone who sort of diffuses into this regime of locally increased pheromone density and

they start to get pulled to the places where there's increased density.

And then that ends up reinforcing.

And as soon as there's like a ridge of high pheromone connecting the food back to the nest entrance,

That's the formation of a pheromone trail.

So no ant needed a bird's eye view or a goal to even form a trail.

It's a purely agent level process-based explanation by which you get the emergence of

phenotype that goes beyond what one nestmate knows or even prefers and that's the existence of a trail now you can imagine that colonies that have the appropriate parameters like the right amount of explore versus exploit how much to follow one pheromone how rapidly should the pheromone decay

those parameters are actually shaped by the evolutionary process.

Colonies with maladaptive decision making of nest mates are not going to bring home the seeds, they're not going to reproduce.

Whereas for any given niche, if the regularities can be captured by the decision making algorithm that the ants use, you'll see those parameters plus slight variations on them in the future.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Thank you.

And that kind of brings us to a figure two, which I, um, threw up here and, uh, I, I clicked this quote from the paper.

So it's talking about the rate of pheromone decay, and it says informationally, this decay rate can be thought, thought of.

Thoughts of an environmental perturbation or drift that counteracts the reinforcing effect of digmergic convergence.

And so in this, and here, even in the figure of legend,

And it says, like, we chose the representative simulation that did not tune the parameters to discover optimal decision-making.

And so I was just wondering if you played with the decay rate at all.

Because I think about, like, if the pheromone didn't decay, there would be a really difficult time switching, like, from one arm of the maze to the other when the food source switches.

So you have to forget at some point where the food was.

And this kind of brings me to one of the big questions is like, how important is this decay rate in like the memory of Anthony?

Like, so, so this is clearly like an example of niche modification where they lay down the pheromone and it externalizes their memory of where the food is for other ants in the colony.

But there's this, um,

you know, it has to decay.

Otherwise they're just confused.

Like if we were flooded all of the time with all of our memories, like unable to distinguish our memory from

the present time, which happens in some forms of neuro diseases, neuro atypical people have this inability to distinguish the present from the past from the future.

So just is that a critical thing or do you have any comments on that maybe?

Or maybe Stephen wants to comment on what I said and then you comment.

Or Stephen, do you want to go first or what do you think?


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, yeah, I'll just add one thing to that.

Yeah, I think that's a good point is, I suppose, how much does the ability to allow the environment to re, I suppose, re-remember, or not re-remember, but reformulate.

So you may not need to forget as much as just change how much you're weighting what you're

you give priority to.

So in a way, it's like by knowing something that you're more certain about, it might get something similar.

So I'd be interested about that idea of offloading onto the environment and how that maybe negates some of that.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So it is akin to forgetting.

But what's really interesting is it's the colony forgetting because the ant doesn't have a direct memory.

So as we encoded it.

So it's a lot like cumulative culture.

There's a totally qualitative difference between what an individual remembers on board and then what the culture remembers.

And so we do modification on our cultural niche.

Greetings, Scott.

And so that enables new dynamics of learning and forgetting, which are distinct, have different mechanisms than the ones that happen at the nestmate slash individual person level.

And so it is a forgetting that occurs.

And otherwise you would get stigmatic reinforcement, stigmatic tightening, and it would end up just being overfit to the way things were.

and then you wouldn't be able to access new resources or have the flexibility to find the seed after it moves to the other branch.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Sorry, did you have something else to add?


SPEAKER_00:
How goes it, Scott?


SPEAKER_05:
Hi, Scott.

So here, we'll switch on to... Oh, Stephen.

Go ahead, Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah.

Just one thing, Daniel, I was wondering how much you think, I mean, I know it's an ant model, but you know, you're talking about extrapolating to beyond how you just mentioned that with culture.

So that, um, I wonder if there's some principles that starting to emerge that you think you're kind of curious about exploring further because of that ability to think differently about how we know about


SPEAKER_00:
The precursor model to active inference was actually on slide 53, the acquisition of culturally patterned attention styles under active inference.

So this was a visual scanning, visual foraging model where the eyes scanned over pottery designs and there were cultural preferences for certain local motifs.

And so it's kind of interesting that we almost stripped the cultural interpretation away to apply it to ants.

And I do think that it could be reintegrated in.

It just helps us clarify that we can know what the individual level mechanisms are.

like a personal preference, what is being sensed by the person, and what are their action affordances, kind of like all the variables in the active inference model, perception, cognition, and action.

And then the external states can be other agents, and we've talked about communicating agents before, but the external states can also be something that's cumulatively modified.

And so when your sensory capacities include the ability to read websites, and then your action affordances include the ability to modify websites, it would take transposing the model into those different

inputs, generative models and outputs, but it does suggest that we don't have to make everything only existing as a function of interactions amongst active inference agents.

In fact, cumulative culture helps us distinguish pieces that are clearly cognitive, clearly on board from outcomes that are clearly cumulative and have memory that isn't just what the agent remembers.


SPEAKER_02:
Almost gives a rationale for fashion.

in a way, could be interesting as well.

When you think about design and pottery, there's a fashion of other things as well.


SPEAKER_00:
That makes me think about who controls how the seed switches arms.

So here, it's the spatial movement of the seed from one side to the other and the switching dynamics.

But fashion, I mean, I guess what people wear or just like, oh, it's a fashionable book.

It's sort of a way in which people's niche modifications include locating and moving or hiding seeds.

And it's like, oh, you didn't know about this band?

Like I foraged better because I know this band that you don't know.

That's sort of like hipster informational foraging.

and so how do people signal through fashions you know keep up with the times cubism is the art that we all look at this is what we think is cool or this seed location is no longer in vogue so maybe some types of foraging metaphors could help us understand cultural phenomena that also feels like


SPEAKER_06:
Go ahead, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
That also feels like an Irving Goffman kind of reference of projecting out as you want to be perceived, that recursivity.

So that, you know, if you want to be perceived as a mountain climber, you wear a shirt from a mountain climbing store.

And so you're expressing a thing and you want to be perceived as that.

So there's that kind of that mirror effect that goes on to define ourselves by how others see us.

It also reminds me, the earlier notion of the cumulative embodiment reminds me of the David Bohm work that all reality is first a thought, and so the realities that are accumulated are just accumulated thoughts that then become artifacts of that interaction, and then their embodiment is left in that intergenerational communication

through language and through material culture is where the mind resides really in the interaction with those things.

So we're able to communicate in deep time that way.

They, it reminds me of that quote that Bach and Mozart didn't die.

They turned into their music.

Right.

So we still communicate with them.

We still hear them.

at who they what they were communicating out the realities that they were trying to create became embodied and they're still available to us through deep time and over space as well and so that may be part of the cultural affordances are the leveraging of the communication the leveraging of self and identity and you start to have people able to pick up on those and and leverage it themselves and then they take it and take it in a slightly different direction then you have that

innovation that happens and one of the things i find fascinating in fashion and in food are two places you do not have intellectual property protection of copyright but they're the most innovative or if you're from england in innovative areas um which is fascinating right because they don't need the excuse for intellectual property laws the rationale is that it helps to promote innovation but in fact the most innovative things don't aren't afforded that protection they're more in a

foraging kind of enthusiasms that make those things.


SPEAKER_00:
you end up with the intergenerational maintenance not just construction and enshrinement of a pyramid but the actual ongoing maintenance of cumulative culture whereas it's not enough to just do it once and then leave it behind and so it is interesting about how um

the process and carrying the process forward gives you the static objects of cumulative culture, but the cumulative culture and the static objects themselves, they don't map one-to-one onto a process, let alone adaptive one or a successful one.

And that relates to the way that reward was modeled in this simulation and also to dopamine.

So I know we'll get there.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Stephen, and then Scott.


SPEAKER_02:
This reminds me as well.

There was a marketing manager that I once spoke to, and he was telling me they pay people to go into bars and to drink certain drinks in trendy clubs in the big cities, say in London or whatever, so that they would be seen to be drinking that drink, and then it starts to spark off.

Of course, it's completely covert.

but this sort of thing you can see how that distorts people's um stigmatic trail because they see someone who's presumably very good looking or fashionable or very high status or whatever at the bar sitting on the stool drinking the drink in a conspicuous way and they they take the cues at some level so anyway i thought that's interesting


SPEAKER_05:
Okay, so I think we can maybe move into the oh, sorry.

Oh, sorry, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
I was looking I was looking for the shoot.

Can you hear me?

Yeah.

Okay, sorry, I was looking for the controls.

I totally lost my screen.

It's sort of screwed up.

In the US, Stephen, there's a thing, I was looking for the word for it, but there's actually, when you go into a bar and say, I'd like an absolute vodka, please.

If you've been hired by Absolute, you're required to say, I've been hired by Absolute Vodka.

I'd like an absolute vodka, please.

They actually have a disclosure requirement for that exact behavior where people go in bars.

And if you're being paid, you need to make a disclosure as a technical matter under federal law.

So I thought that was pretty interesting.

There was another point I was going to make, but I spaced on it because I liked your point so much.

Sorry.


SPEAKER_00:
It's like an active disclosure.

Here's my preferences.

Here's my expectations.

Here's some components of my generative model.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

Awesome.

Martha?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I was just wondering, since you were talking so much about the distributed cognition now and making sort of extrapolations there,

there clearly must be some limitations uh there right because um i i assume or guess that um like human culture societies have a larger capacity to change phenotype compared to let's say the limited variables that an ant colony might have and that might be subject to

evolutionary pressures and is there, let's say, is there larger flexibility in phenotype for human culture, would you say?


SPEAKER_00:
We almost have affordances that include changing the hyper parameters, the higher order parameters on our niche.

And clearly the scope of our niche modification has expanded as well.

So it'd be like if this ant colony, you know, we added another level, it can decide where to move the seed to, or it can decide to modify the structure of the maze.

I mean, we know that ants build, they build their nest architecture in many cases.

So what happens when you enable a new kind of affordance, it reveals like a whole new game theoretic or signaling theoretic dynamic that can flip the

how it would have been otherwise.

Like in a fixed maze, maybe there's a strategy that works, but maybe if you add this ability to move blocks, maybe the strategy is actually to make a hypotenuse just going straight to the food.

So that totally changes which parameters of learning and forgetting you might wanna have.

And so it's a very interesting question about how affordances come into play.

How do they interact?

And then what is happening with humans with our new affordances, our ability to have long range synchronous conversations and to make irreversible ecological decisions as well.

Those affordances for niche modification and communication are changing what it means to be human.


SPEAKER_05:
Definitely agree with that.

As we kind of mentioned in the dot zero contextualization video.

Any more thoughts on that or we can maybe move on to these colony level metrics in Figure 3?


SPEAKER_00:
Figure 3, just to describe the two on 23.

On the left is just a tally of basically the seeds returned home, just the count of the round trips.

And then that is being shown through time steps on the X axis for four different numbers of foragers, like 10, 30, 50, and 70.

And so again, we weren't like tuning parameters or making statistical claims, but it's interesting to see that the 30, 50, and 70, the ones that kind of look like step funk, same accumulation dynamics as the others do.

And then on the right side is that swarm coherence, the distance metric amongst nest mates.

And so again, maybe this could be run out or it would be different on the map shape and all these other things.

But just to see that the average distance sort of increases and then stabilizes at a somewhat characteristic rate.

So these are phenotypes that nest mates don't have.

but they're composed of the phenotype, the position, the behavior, et cetera, of the nest mates.

And so again, it just points to the need to be clear.

Like, when are we talking about individual level phenotypes that might be in feedback with environments or with collective outcomes?

And when are we actually talking about specifically collective outcomes?


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

So I have a question that relates to this directly.

So in this kind of colony cohesion, or I think you called it swarm coherence,

There's a distance metric that is measured, but in real ant colonies, are there other metrics that are used to judge this kind of cohesion?

Because I wonder about the time that's spent communicating, like ant-to-ant communication time.

Does this also enhance colony performance, or what other kinds of metrics can you use to determine this kind of cohesion?


SPEAKER_00:
We talked about this a lot with the authors, and so we thought, okay, well, there's like the Euclidean distance, the average distance or the distribution of distances amongst nest mates.

One could also look at the correlation of their trajectories.

So a perfect correlation of the trajectories would be like every ant is taking the same trip.

Whereas no correlation of trajectory would mean like every ant was going on a different direction or having different movement dynamics.

And so that could be computed over the total trajectory of each ant or even at each time step.

Like on the next time step, zero correlation means like that there's 50 going up, 50 going left, 50 going down, 50 to the right.

Or maybe there's like this sort of

shift a coordinated shift within a time step as well as among time steps so looking at the correlation and trajectories the mutual information um these kinds of things could be calculated for the colony and then we thought you know it might not even be easy to rank these because what if the mutual information is low because they're doing different types of foraging and that is constituting a more coherent swarm

So just because their correlation is high, that's sort of like first pass.

Oh, well, it must be a coherent swarm because everyone's taking the same trajectory.

But then there's this other type of coherence that might even be more emergent when the correlation or the mutual information of trajectories is low.

And it's actually by virtue of that, that the colony is able to achieve things that the nest mates don't.

Awesome.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, can I just ask, when you mention that, about the different types of movements and correlation, do you think that could point towards...

how there could be different types of counterfactuals brought to the table.

So maybe the information coming back as well, it's been a seed.

It could be a counterfactual.

I suppose the wall, it's not a seed, but it's a wall.

I don't know.

Maybe that doesn't, I haven't thought it through, but I'm just wondering how counterfactuals might play out.


SPEAKER_00:
AIM counterfactuals is an interesting question.

Because it's a mental ascription, which we think we can do.

But then do ants do counterfactuals or how do they at least act as if?

And it's a great question.

Just one thought would be the resilience of their algorithm is such that they act as if they're taking counterfactuals into account.

So for example, their trail is functional when it's functional, but then it's always like this adjacent possible that the trail could be disrupted.

And when the trail is disrupted, they find a way to go around or to repair the trail.

And so it's like by having this counterfactual, like the adjacent possible that they might not have a functional pheromone density,

There's this self repairing and regenerating aspect to their behavior in nature that makes it look as if they are accommodating these counterfactuals.

And it reminds me of one of the greatest disinfo scenes of all time in a bug's life, I believe, or maybe ants like where a leaf drifts down.

And then all the ants are carrying the seed, of course, in their hands, not in their mandibles, which is not how ants carry seeds.

And then like the overseer comes over and blows a whistle.

Everybody stop.

You know, the first ant that was returning home gets anxious.

It's like you couldn't stack.

I know it's just a movie, so I know, chill out, etc.

But you couldn't stack more misconceptions into that representation of how resilience actually arises in foraging.

An overseer doesn't come and the first ant engages with the barrier and then goes around it or over it.

And that is what ends up allowing the rest of the ants who don't have communication with any overseer or even that first ant to participate in that refunctionalization of that part of the trail.

So it would be cool to see representations that don't disinform as to how ants actually work.


SPEAKER_02:
That's really cool.

That's a really cool response, actually.

I also suppose

You could flip that as well and say, well, maybe the adjacent possibles of these paths that the ants are taking in the environment is maybe that's how we get our counterfactuals in the brain.

It could be like a foraging path, you know.

I'm not saying that's how it is, but maybe at times there's something that mirrors that, but in our own cognition.


SPEAKER_04:
Scott?


SPEAKER_01:
Daniel, that reminds me of our misunderstanding of how ants work.

It reminds me of the assertion I read that dogs in the wild don't have the alpha dog kind of characteristic and the impact mentality.

I don't know the research on this, but that they learn that from humans.

And so it's interesting, we kind of project onto animals human ideas about

stacking or whatever social status.

And it's fascinating to think whether in art, because we were talking about fashion before, might the arts be a vehicle for inviting humans to start to understand things that ants know?

What can we find from the art world, a movie or something like that, which did a different treatment of it and started children embracing that, because children are learning from these movies.

It's a fascinating notion to think about how a more, I use the word accurate portrayal, but a more maybe sensitive portrayal to the dynamics of other biological beings might help us as biological beings to find our way

Because certainly the abstractions that we're teaching children now are not fully functional.

So there's some additional learnings there.

A conversation I was on just before this, we were talking about capacity building in precarious populations.

And I was pointing out a similar kind of thing where we were saying, well, we might have things to learn from precarious populations.

It might not just be parachuting in colonial type solutions.

but rather what can we learn from new discoveries?

And this was in the context of the idea of bringing technology for information to precarious populations, but in the reverse of it, bringing community knowledge to technologies, the reverse flow.

And again, similarly here, maybe the community knowledge of ants needs to be brought to the technology architectures

that we're talking about rather than us constantly being blinded to the architectural elements that we might have because we have these centralized elements these alpha dog notions these things that we project out so we're unable to learn because we're just imposing a structure on something that may not be there so we can't learn nice daniel


SPEAKER_00:
the history of psychological projections onto the ants and the bees is tremendous.

It relates to sex and gender and politics.

I mean, she's called the queen and she's called a she, but she's just a diploid insect.

So how do we go from,

From the words that we use and the kinds of models that we use to describe how the colony functions.

Is it an economic maximizer?

Is that the goal?

Is GDP maximization or is getting seeds the goal?

And that was one of Professor Gordon's insights as well is like.

It's not just about maximizing the per capita return on foraging in terms of seeds, which optimal foraging theory often suggested, because in the desert, it's costly to go out foraging.

You are spending water to get seeds, which give you energy and water.

But it's kind of like there's a time where you don't actually need to get more seeds.

So the way that the projections occur and that they are mapped sometimes implicitly or explicitly to our human systems and ideologies is very interesting.

And I think that relates more to this general point in active inference, which is actually that sensory observations are ambiguous.

That's the insight of Helmholtz and unconscious perception, which is like the perception of ants, even if the edge detection is relatively unambiguous,

what it is that the ants are doing, whether they're taking care of every nestmate and it's like utopia, or they're sloughing off the useless ones and it's like hellish, that's our projection.

And so that's why it's so interesting to have a model where we can be clear about what the sensory observations are of ants, of ourselves, and then how our generative model

is actually what is generating perception.

You know, we see with our mind, not with our eyes.

So the ant is also perceiving with its mind, not just its antenna.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
That's a really very, very good point.

And also, I think with Helmholtz, bringing that back in is really useful in terms of how we project, because

he was a way for us to get back to what we already knew.

It's like with all our intelligence, we, as psychology came in and this knowing and this perspective that knows and that becoming this almost unspoken axiom that we didn't even know was unspoken.

Everything from there on in was about what do you think about this?

And what do you think about that?

And what do you think about the other?

And a hundred years later, you know, we're in all sorts of problems, right?

well, we were very quickly in all sorts of problems actually at the beginning.

So suddenly, you know, going back before then, it'd be interesting to know about 300 years ago, they'd probably look at us with a wry smile and they'd be like, yeah, right?

Because they hadn't had a whole load of other stuff that involves this knowledge of knowing as being about thinking and us.

And it was much more in the kind of,

know unknown states of the world i mean their dictionaries weren't even there right so they didn't have that defined language in the same way um so yeah i think that's that's a nice point well lang language becomes oh sorry scott and then daniel


SPEAKER_01:
language becomes that artifact again that's why i keep uh yeah again it's not it's not accurate what i say when i say the mind resides in language and material culture but it's i just keep saying it to get people off thinking that it resides in the brain and so it's it just be that that those traces we leave of prior interactions that seem functional

become so ascendant.

You're born feral.

And then you kind of look and observe what works.

And it's so localized.

Knowledge is so localized.

And now it's become the access to broad knowledge is so great that there's nothing that suggests that the human lifespan was designed to be able to absorb all the knowledge that's now available.

We're not necessarily able to do it, but we try.

I certainly try.

Look at all of us that have books around us.

We're surrounded by this.

We're trying to figure all this stuff out, but there's nothing that says we should be able to, and certainly not as individuals.

Then I start thinking, well, okay, I'll take solace in the fact that we, this is the synthetic intelligence thing I keep yapping about, instead of artificial intelligence, we know

That's good.

That's pretty nice.

That means that what I got to do is just cultivate the we, not the I. That jump is what it feels like.

I'm wondering.

It feels like humans could be better served by at least being sensitive to this.

We're not going to become ants, but we would be better served by a sensitivity to this.

It feels like there's a vast amount of human

de-suffering that could be made available if this could be made available.

And I'm not sure if it's through the arts or through economics or what the mechanisms of influence will be to allow the enjoyment of the additional solution space or additional existential space that these observations offer.

You know, it doesn't necessarily change the way we act

every day but it definitely could adjust the existential aspects of the human condition and that seems like they would indirectly serve to reduce anxiety and maybe hatred as a result anyway sorry for the ramble daniel


SPEAKER_00:
steven you brought up um 300 years ago and so it wasn't exactly 300 years ago but it's within about five to ten years of 300 years ago was a book called the fable of the bees private vices public benefits and um i think it's it's worth reading one of the summaries of what this poem and book is about

The thesis is that contemporary society is an aggregation of self-interested individuals necessarily bound to one another, neither by their shared civic commitments nor their moral rectitude, but paradoxically by the tenuous bonds of envy, competition, and exploitation.

So it's a bit of a parable about private vice and public benefits in a bee colony and about how and why that succeeds or it doesn't.

And let's work with the preferences and sensory capacities and affordances that we have, and then think about how to engineer that with stigmergy and cumulative culture to the kind of collective outcomes that we want to see, rather than try to optimize it at potentially a lower level or without the whole picture in mind, which could lead to not just private vice, but public vice as well.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Yeah, thanks.

So in a way, what you're saying, when they're talking about envy and such, it's more like, I suppose, a phenotypical or social property rather than this individual, oh, you've got it, well done.

But now we tend to now focus it as an individual behavioural

abnormality i suppose or and you lose that capacity or we've lost that capacity or hopefully now we're gaining it to speak at that bigger level and not just the bigger level in terms of a statistical social science averaging but one where people are actually still purposefully engaged in the process so that mid-scale type of thing


SPEAKER_05:
So Daniel, and then I'll give my thought.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh yeah.

Blue.


SPEAKER_05:
Oh, so my, um, that kind of tied back to what Scott was saying about, um, you know, like all the books that you have around us and also into this like concept of synergy.

And it's something that I was thinking about, like just yesterday, we had this literacy report come out in New Mexico.

That was just horrible.

Right.

Like, the kids can't read.

I mean, not for a long, long, long time.

But maybe, you know, it made me think, like, we are doing this method of communication here, like, via YouTube and connecting, like, over Zoom, but we're into this, like, oratory or even, like, I don't know, audiovisual?

Like, is there a bigger word for that?

Like, a video transduction of information?

And it's like, are we, you know, maybe the need to read and write is becoming obsolete.

I mean, as we're moving in and as we're, you know, externalizing all of this into our niche environment, I mean, in the history of early humans, history was an oral tradition.

And then it became a written tradition.

And now maybe the need for reading and writing is not there because we're back into this ability to directly communicate across vast distances and to leave recorded traces of this audiovisual communication in time.

I mean, yes, in a media that's less permanent, I mean, if the internet survives or whatever, but I mean, we're all under the assumption that, you know, in 50 years, if humans are still alive, this video will be archived in the Wayback Machine or somewhere, right?

And so maybe are we losing the need for that?

I don't know, just a thought.

Daniel, go ahead.


SPEAKER_00:
So I'll give a comment on that related to ant brains, and then we can go to the dopamine discussion.

So there's a scaling relationship that people have observed with social mammals, where the larger the group size of the mammal, the larger the relative brain is.

So that suggests that sociality in mammals includes like memory loss.

The ability to simulate counterfactuals, potentially theory of mind or thinking through other minds like we talk about in active inference.

But being social for mammals is clearly like a cognitive load.

And in the ants, a trend in the other direction is observed where larger colony sizes have often smaller numbers.

relative brain size of the workers.

And that's one of the key differences between social and you social.

So a lot of times people will talk about the bees and the ants as being social as if they're hanging out or doing it because they like each other.

But the reality is that ants have been colony living for 120 million years of evolution slash one creation, however you want to look at it.

And they're not doing it just to hang out.

So it shows that once you make this

phase transition from social, which might have increased cognitive burden to use social, it might be associated with decreased cognitive burden and decreased cognitive necessity of the individuals because it's like, it's good to follow the trail and go off on your own and just wander around and leave the trail when you find new food, et cetera.

Those are simple rules that aren't necessarily requiring tremendous onboard cognition.

Yeah, Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
Maybe that's why populations of humans don't have to be educated.

Maybe we're going back to that and say maybe we don't need high levels of teaching for everybody in society.


SPEAKER_00:
There's always going to be a distribution of education and many dimensions of that education.

And all we can hope is that the cumulative context supports everyone.


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, the reality is even even if we tried, not everyone's going to be a brain surgeon and a rocket scientist and an ant scientist and this and a lawyer and a doctor and the grocer.

Right.

So we have to specialize and parse.

And so it's kind of interesting because the aspiration of self cultivation suggests that you want to have a, you know,

strong body, strong mind, and every individual needs to be the representation of everything.

But it's not maybe that aspiration of power being residing in an individual through individual capacities is not scalable.

You know, even though it's observed in mammals at a certain scale, maybe at a certain scale, you have to be used social because the intrinsic complexity of the society and the information available is such that it's impossible to

to reside in a single brain but again one of the things i say is that the i tell people the brain is infinitely capacious because it's just an antenna and it's just tuning into the mind which itself has whatever capacity every capacity so again maybe we need to train more not in substance but in process of learning or in knowledge discovery rather than in facts


SPEAKER_05:
so that people can navigate the mind that's collective with their brain that's an antenna i had a similar thought actually scott like maybe i mean we're we're becoming so connected like you know in even just a hundred years ago we were very dispersed and so maybe as as we're becoming more connected we're becoming more like a high have developing more of like a high

Mind where like the reliance on individual survival or cognition is is less so Steven and then we'll go to Daniel and I'm just gonna say just in instead of just-in-time manufacturing is just-in-time thinking And also tying into that process piece You know how much it is about?


SPEAKER_02:
getting the knowledge i.e the book off the shelf and how much is it knowing the policies for how to engage that book can be the thing and that's where it can be valuable to see an old video or to have met you know someone who actually met einstein would have known that other side to how he wrote those books right we just have this encoded form and there's other ways things can be encoded right um and that may be what you experience when you have a

chat with someone, maybe a professor or someone who wrote the book, which is how there's, there's, there's that quality to it.

And that, that might be something where thinking about, cause in a way these ants are really, they've got to have trust in their action policies, scaffolded by,

some sort of pheromone trial and if you actually look at most psychiatry it is basically taking the individual and trying to maybe reduce their anxiety or the distortions changing serotonin or dopamine levels

um and i think what this is showing is well you know that might make someone less anxious and less you know less challenged in their integration into society but there's another there might be other ways and that speaks to eco-psychology and other things which maybe seemed a little bit

hippy before, but they can be scientifically rigorous from what we're talking about.

And that's great.


SPEAKER_05:
so just a quick little interject question because stephen brought it up and this is something that i've been like thinking about and i was going to bring it up with with the counterfactual point but like is there a role for trust in new social insect synergy like like can you maybe daniel has examples of ants that are liars or ants that can't be trusted or like is there some kind of like deviant form of ant thought or behavior and then it brings


SPEAKER_00:
I'll give one interesting example of that, which is under the clean division of labor model, one would expect that Queens should just be like super fertile and workers should never have any capacity for fertility.

And so when it was found empirically in honeybees and in some ants,

that some workers had partially activated ovaries, like they retained the capacity to reproduce, which is also facilitated in those insects because unfertilized females can make male eggs just by making a haploid egg.

Initially, that was framed as cheating.

And it was in the game theory of cheating and all of these ways that you could think about economic exploitation, free rider problem.

But at the same time, it's the case that queens do die.

And when that happens, the colony is almost hedging its bets against one failure mode by having this just-in-time capacity to salvage some reproductive fitness with pre-activated workers.

So was it deceptive at one level?

Was it adaptive at another level?

There's many examples like that, and I would say it all falls under that ambiguous stimulus heading.

I'll ask a question from the chat, because it will take us towards the brain.

Sergio asks, how can the autonomy of an agent, for example, an immune B cell living within another autonomous meta agent, like a mammal, be accounted by colony behavior and stigmaty?

It's an awesome question.

It speaks to the nested formalisms.

So ants also have mobile cells and we're abstracting around that when we just have a nestmate level model, but potentially nested modeling could speak to that because T cells are perceiving their local niche.

And then they're acting in their niche.

They're releasing cytokines and they're changing the immune context, which can bring other T cells or B cells down.

And then I posted a paper recently

distributed adaptive search in T cells lessons from ants with professor Gordon and others that was explicitly about that.

It was like a triple play collaboration with ants, immune cells and computational search algorithms and the way in which computational search algorithms and computational frameworks like active inference, although not in that paper, give us a common descriptive ability across different

the ants and the t cells but then we once we frame it we learn from the ants and the t cells and the richness of nature and that expands our computational models so it's like a feedback in the informational niche between the kinds of cognitive and computational models we propose that helps us generalize and then we get surprised by ways that nature actually works out

that feeds back into how we modify our models so maybe anyone else can give a comment on the the b cell and the ants and then otherwise we can go to the dopamine i think we're good yeah to go to the ants in the dopamine actually marco i was curious how i know it's a big question but how has dopamine been seen

in the human neuro community and clinical side?

And where does actor inference come into play or expand on that?

Because I suspect that we might see some parallels with what it's doing in ants as well.

But what is the situation been and where is it going with human dopamine?


SPEAKER_03:
Well, I think that depends on who you're asking.

There is for sure one big focus on the rewarding effects or let's say the role of dopamine in addiction and not just as a positive prediction error signal.

But then, of course, you have so and that you might put at the

um you know at the dopamine tract that comes from the vta and goes basically throughout the the cortex and also to the nucleus accumbens but then you have also the movement facilitatory role of dopamine which stems from the substantia nigra and innervates the striatum and basically serves a action policy selection role

um via selecting competing affordances i guess you could say and and by that you select one movement strategy and if you lack dopamine then basically you um you're freezing in your movements and that's one of the cardinal symptoms that you get in parkinson's disease um and as an

overarching principle, I guess, at least that's the intuition I have right now, is that dopamine somehow modulates how someone, like an agent, interacts with the environment.

It's more this interface.

How do you weight signals from the environment that you can react to?

And that's, I think, the aspect that combines the rewarding function of dopamine with the

motion and action permitting function.

So yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

I see a lot of interesting parallels with the ant world.

So first, for those who might not be familiar, ants and invertebrates have a lot of the same molecules in their brain as mammals do.

So like some of the same exact neurotransmitters like serotonin and dopamine, which is why some of the same drugs that mimic the structure of those neurotransmitters have effect in invertebrates as well as in vertebrates, but they don't have the same

anatomy of the brain.

So like you mentioned the VTA and the substantia nigra that ants and the invertebrates don't have those exact structures.

However, they do have some structures that play similar computational or functional roles.

So point one is that's an argument for why we need to look beyond just the brain layout of the mammals.

because not all cognitive systems inside or even beyond animals have that exact layout.

So it motivates just like we've been talking about, like looking at the specifics, really understanding how does these different dopaminergic signaling pathways work in the mammals, but also what are they doing functionally and computationally so that we can understand and design other systems.

And then, um,

Dopamine has been studied for playing a role in the regulation of individual foraging in invertebrates as well as in vertebrates.

So people have done experiments with giving dopaminergic drugs to insects and seeing how it increases their foraging activity.

And even in the ants that are shown on slide 14, those ants, the ant going into the nest entrance there is painted because it's been treated with dopamine.

So it's possible to collect ants and then either treat them with dopamine and measure how much it influences their dopamine levels in the brain.

We found that increases in brain dopamine through pharmacology increased foraging activity.

And we found that providing an inhibitor of dopamine synthesis decreased ants foraging activity relative to like a control group on the same day.

So on first pass, that is consistent with this reward role for dopamine.

And that's the kind of empirical observations that people have found confirms their belief that dopamine is playing a role in reward.

But then what you said at the end there, that reward and action come together with sensitivity.

And so we can actually add in something that we know about these ants and about other ants to think about how does dopamine play that role?

Well, in this ant species, we know that individual nest mates make the decision to go foraging or not.

probabilistically, depending on the rate of interactions that they have with incoming successful forager nest mates.

So if there's a high rate of incoming successful foragers, it stimulates more foraging.

And if there's a low rate, it seizes foraging activity.

It's like if you block incoming foragers from coming in, there's a lag followed by a drop off in foragers leaving.

And if you have an excess of foragers coming in, it leads to an excess going out, which eventually does deplete the workforce.

So it's not like there's infinite ants they can just keep on sending, but that's a self-regulating process so that when things are good and food is coming in, send more.

It's a good day to forage.

But if there's only a trickle or there's like a predator blocking one of the paths, then no more ants go out.

And so one of our hypotheses, although it would take a few other kinds of experiments to really go into this in detail, would be that dopamine plays a role in modulating the sensitivity to interactions of nest mates with each other and their sensitivity to changes in environmental conditions.

And so by framing what dopamine does as modulating precision or modulating sensitivity to interactions, we integrate the mechanisms that we know actually underlie the regulation of foraging in ants with the empirical outcomes that increases of dopamine signaling increased foraging activity and decreases decreased foraging activity.


SPEAKER_04:
So Stephen and then Marco.


SPEAKER_02:
I'd be interested what your thoughts are in terms of the type of foraging, whether it's kind of an anxious-like foraging, if that makes sense.

Because often I think that some of the serotonin-inhibiting medications, they're helping to reduce anxiety.

And there could be a difference between the way that people are reading those sensory inputs.

So I suppose could the ants be...

also foraging more if they're anxiously foraging, if that makes sense, maybe a sudden peak.

And then at some point, that doesn't become such a dominant dynamic for addressing reward.


SPEAKER_05:
Do you want to respond, Daniel?

And then we'll go to Marco.


SPEAKER_00:
yes there hasn't been a huge amount of work on serotonin forging but there is one paper i'll post in chat which is serotonin modulates worker responsiveness to trail pheromone in the ant by doli dentata so it is known that different neurotransmitter systems play a role in modulating the sensitivity to interactions and whether that gets psychologized or projected again i don't think that's always the right move to make but empirically serotonin does play a role there


SPEAKER_03:
So that makes me wonder, so the neuromodulators that you usually find in mammal brains, do they all exist in ants as well, including norepinephrine, acetylcholine, et cetera?


SPEAKER_04:
Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
So it's a very interesting question.

There are some that are kind of like A-level celebrities in vertebrates and invertebrates like dopamine and serotonin.

Then epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are very important for the regulation of arousal in vertebrates, their functional roles are to a large extent played by actually the neurotransmitter pair of tyramine and octopamine in invertebrates, which are trace amines.

received at the trace amine receptor in vertebrates.

And so the exact proportions of these different neurotransmitters differ in vertebrates and invertebrates, but the metabolic enzymes are

in the same gene families.

And that was some of the most interesting analyses was actually to look at the sequence evolution and the duplication and deletion events of the metabolic enzymes that transform neurotransmitters into each other from common amino acids into neurotransmitters, synthesizing and degrading them.

And then the protein receptors that are used on the cell membrane, like the dopamine receptor.

So the gene families are homologous.

The chemicals are similar.

And neuropeptides, there are some that are ancient gene families that are shared across animals.

And there's other vertebrate specific and invertebrate specific neuropeptide gene families.

So they're more similar than dissimilar.

there's a massive amount of overlap and that's why again like drugs that are designed for working in one species often have a similar effect like neonicotinoid pesticides they affect the acetylcholine receptors of invertebrates broadly just like nicotine affects the acetylcholine receptors of humans right yeah I think the really cool


SPEAKER_03:
promise of active inference is that you can understand different cognitive systems in terms of the messages that are being passed.

And there are lots of comparisons you can make.

And I guess that's also a good general test of the substance behind the whole framework.

to try and make those mappings where you say you have signals that get passed from bottom up, like typically by a glutamatergic trains of spikes, let's say.

They might be matched by expectation that come from top-down, which might be inhibitory.

And then you have all sorts of modulatory signaling molecules that sets the precision of certain messages there.

And once you have that framework established, you should be able to find it in all kinds of different cognitive systems, whether they are structured like the brain, where you have

physical pathways that link one region and another, or whether they are, let's say, more based on externalized elements like pheromone trails or whatever.

So very much at the beginning, but I think there's lots to discover.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, Marco, I just want to respond to that really quickly.

You know, we were I don't know if you caught our last livestream.

I think it was twenty eight point two, just the one that was last week.

But we were we were talking about

you know it's interesting we're talking about mental wandering like what does mental wandering have to do with like foraging or ants but but there's a lot of a lot of connections to be drawn and really like we're thinking about um you know tracing a thought through the brain like like which is i mean my background is also neuroscience which is like passing a message from one neuron to the next neuron to the end really the basis of the paper was

mental wandering and meditation and like the, you know, not suppression of thought, but like when you consciously inhibit, you know, thoughts from wandering around.

So it's a mindfulness practice.

And it's really interesting because in the ant colony, there's so many relationships that I can see.

I mean, even between foraging, when you're wandering, when you're mental wandering, is that thought foraging?

But I mean, also more than that, because there is that synaptic release.

And so I wonder if that synaptic release or synaptic transmission that happens in neurons is similar to this pheromone deposition.

So you have synaptic release, and that encourages more neurons to keep signaling.

And so you have this pheromone deposition, and that encourages more ants to keep foraging on those trails.

And so I really do wonder how much of what our role is in neurotransmitters is externalized in this kind of niche modification and external cognition, which would happen for us indirectly.

But I wonder if the ants are doing that as part of this high-mind mentality.

Sorry, Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
I was rambling.

Yeah, no, it's very, very interesting points.

One thing I really picked up as well with what you're saying, Marco, is

This message passing that you have in active inference is very liberating because you traditionally talked about in terms of signals and signals ends up maybe being electrical signals and it ends up being like a wire that we think of in the

in our other electronic world.

And it's a very big trap.

So then there's somehow a signal going through.

And then next thing you know, everything implicitly or explicitly becomes a computer.

But there's just this general idea of message passing somehow.

So signals, still, it's hard not to make signals about a transmission system more like in a wire.

But message passing, at first, I used to wonder, why are they using that term?

Because it seems so ambiguous and like, what's going on with that?

But in some ways, I can see there's so much benefit from that, from that formulism.


SPEAKER_06:
Cool.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, the signal and signal transduction signal processing, which is the frameworks that are used in electronics, but also we talk about like signal transduction in the cell.

So it shows how wide the usage of that signal term is.

And it almost implies an essentialism to the meaning of the signal, like it actually carries a meaning.

But when we think about message passing, we can be clear about what that message is and then look at how the generative model interprets

what is the incoming stimuli or observation, instead of treating the signal as what is bearing meaning, we can think about the stimuli as just being the empirical observation, which as we've been discussing from the sensory level on up through the narrative, observations are ambiguous, and they require a generative model in order for sensemaking to occur.

And so agreed that not only is message passing a way that Bayesian models can be updated, like we learned about from Bert DeVries and others, but it's also a way that we can step away from a sort of signal versus noise partitioning paradigm and move into an empirical observation meeting generative model meaning maker.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so what I also like about this, but I might have a completely different perspective on this than you have.

But the nice thing about messages is that it takes you away from this object orientation where you identify things and you can say they either are okay or they're malfunctioning.

but you rather look at the interaction between, let's say, vertices or objects, and you find maybe more illuminating answers there, if you think about psychopathology, for example.

It's not that you can point to one brain structure and you say, ah, that brain structure is broken, and that's why I have symptoms.

It's rather to think about it in terms of, well, maybe this message cannot be transmitted, and that's maybe the reason, or that's where you have to look for answers.


SPEAKER_05:
So one other thing about message passing that I think a great way to think about active inference is it really grounds it in information theory, because that's like Shannon information is like, you know, spawned from that idea of message passing and coherence in a message, but also in the active inference framework, it's always subject to interpretation.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, I started to think as you were saying that, Marco, about someone shaking hands with someone else.

Okay, so you transmit a handshake, you pass a handshake, you know what I mean?

Because both people have to reach out.

Whereas when you transmit a signal, it can be a one-way, more of a one-way thing.

I suppose in some ways, I think, I sort of agree what you're saying, Blue.

I also would say in some ways that...

Shannon entropy is probably a bit stronger on the signal side.

So in some ways it, it gives that effective message passing, but active inference goes further down where it seems to offer further down that route because it gives this other way to extract.

So it's not like the noise is diminishing the,

the signal.

Um, although it's, it's, there's other ways of getting at through action, um, what's in the signal.

Um, so I suppose in a way it's a bit like the handshake.

It's like, what's that hand saying to me, the funny handshake from the Mason.

Well, I reach out and I hold it, you know, and I get a bit of a better feel and I see what I want to pass up my, uh, predictive processing chain.


SPEAKER_06:
Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
It just makes me think about how when we think about signal occurring amidst noise, it's almost like we're getting one unit of stimuli, whether it's RGB channels on the TV or whether it's a frequency range for audio or whatever it happens to be.

If the task is to find the signal in the noise, we're always going to get less than one.

Could be 99% signal to noise.

It could be 5%.

So we're kind of always going less.

When we think about the stimuli as being a message that's passed to us and something that we enrich, we can make it more than one.

So that secret handshake or that shape can be unpacked

and understood in a broader context.

So for example, how many bits of information does it take to communicate how to make lasagna or something?

It's like, you don't need to describe every single sequence.

Somebody who knows, it only takes one bit of information, maybe just the letter L or something like that.

And so signal processing, again, makes us think about diminishing and filtering out what we're getting in.

Whereas maybe active inference helps moves us towards understandings where there's an enrichment of the information coming in, which is always required, but especially when there's sparse or ambiguous sensory stimuli.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
That's a good point, Daniel.

I mean, that sort of takes you to the value of fairy tales.

And yeah, the idea, I hadn't really thought about that before, but the idea that the generative model

is free to make more of something, um, and embellish it, I suppose.

And of course that, that may also really come into its own when you're bringing in multi-sensory information.

So, you know, there's, there's this uncertainty, but there may have to be something which embellishes, um, early on.

Maybe that explains why children early on get very into dreams and, uh,

very wacky sort of modeling of the world because, um, they maybe want to extrapolate beyond, you know, what that sound and that light source and that feeling and that smell of food is, you know, the porridge for the three bears that Goldilocks is eating is, is actually going to signify for them.

So yeah, that's interesting.


SPEAKER_05:
So did we already have this conversation about, do ants dream of undead crumbs?

Did we have that conversation, Daniel?

Is there a book?

There's something, right?


SPEAKER_00:
I think you dreamed it.


SPEAKER_05:
Okay.

Okay.

So that brings me to my next question was, you know, I wonder, like, I just was, um, listening to Josh and mom's lecture and I read his dream coder, dream coder paper in which like the computer explores like potential recombinations of symbols and stuff in like a, it's like an off phase, like a Helmholtz machine.

There's like a wake sleep cycle in this algorithm that, um, he was using.

And so, um,

You know, I mean, I wonder, I guess ants sleep.

I mean, they like rest.

Do they rest?

They have to like assimilate and update their generative model.

Do they sleep?


SPEAKER_00:
So people have studied circadian rhythm.

and the foragers have a strong circadian rhythm again probably not every single species but we did some work with gene expression and found gene expression cycling of circadian rhythm genes in the brains of foragers but not nurses in this species so nurses always indoors

low key working all the time, they take a lot of micro naps and foragers have more like phasic circadian rhythms, especially for insects that use the sun to navigate like honeybees.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, so what I really wonder is what about the collective like ant generative model, right?

Like you think about this as like a collective behavioral or collective consciousness, like is there, you know, dreaming or potential like recombination, like exploration?

Does that happen in like an ant colony?


SPEAKER_00:
It's an awesome question and another example of true colony phenotypes.

And people have studied the activity waves in ant colonies over multiple timescales, like a minute.

timescales, as well as the circadian rhythms.

And that is actually not dissimilar from the multiple bands in the EEG.

So just like the electrical dynamics of the brain, which present as one sort of just time series, you can do a decomposition to extract out like the alpha and the beta and the theta bandwidths.

So just like there's only one 2.4 gigahertz Wi-Fi wavelength.

yet there's multiple Wi-Fi networks that can coexist.

So how does that multiple coding happen for the signals that we make, like Wi-Fi and radio, for the brain, which is using different frequency bands simultaneously, and there's also these oscillation dynamics in ant colonies.


SPEAKER_05:
So it's the whole colony amidst a wave?

I mean, what kind of signal technology are you using to detect these waves?

I have to... Or not waves, but...

They, whoever it is.


SPEAKER_00:
Similar to the way that the time series of the EEG, you would do a sort of Fourier decomposition to look at the different frequency modes.

Similarly, people look at the spatial position of ants and then can ask what are the activity dynamics through time.

And one paper I'll post in the chat is from 2016 by Gelblum et al.

Emergent oscillations assist obstacle negotiation during cooperative transport.

So actually having this sort of like oscillating group activity helps them not lock on too specifically to an object's direction that it's being pulled.

Like if there's some object and then there's the nest entrance.

Yeah.

Okay.

We'll pull it in a straight line.

Isn't that the shortest distance between two points?

Yes.

But first off, no one knows exactly where the nest entrance is.

And second off, even if it were the most direct, it might not be the most resilient or tractable.

But if you just say, okay, we're going to pull a little bit this way and zigzag it this way and zigzag it that way, you get that wisdom of the nest mates because they each have a different estimate on exactly which way to go.

They get averaged out.

And if there's a little block somewhere built into the movement that this object is being brought home with is the ability to go around it.

And so that's another example about how processes that are dynamic at the very, very micro level with the agents often constitute more adaptive emergent processes and more tractable ones.

It's like we either get the resilience tractable agent level rules, or we get the fantasy.

Well, we should just move it in a straight line.

Everybody should know exactly where to go.

And if they don't, we're going to punish them.

It's not how it works.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

And so that kind of leads nicely into I think we were talking already, actually, about like the wisdom of the crowd and the example with the ox movie that was in the dot zero or maybe last week.

But it really leads me to thinking about collective behavior and collective intelligence.

And just that might be like a nice example.

question for people to give thoughts on because I just it's in my own interest to find out what other people think about the difference between collective behavior and collective intelligence and where is you know any thoughts there on that Stephen yeah sort of linking that and what you're just saying now with what Daniel was just saying in some ways the brain so if you've got


SPEAKER_02:
going more chaotic, which I suppose in some ways you can do through environment or just, and the environment will do it to you.

And then you've got this synchronization of waves, as was mentioned.

So you could go from that kind of synchronization of waves, and I suppose it could become more coordinated or becomes more chaotic.

So you've got this kind of balance in terms of sense-making between,

more entrainment between and more coordination of action either between agents or between the sensory motor

properties of the organism, or which would in some way be more focused, you would imagine, and has that risk of rigidity, but has the advantage of efficiency.

So brainwaves, it seems to have a bit of a mid, this synchronization of brainwaves gives you a sort of a mid-scale potential.

So it's not completely chaotic, but it's not completely synchronized.


SPEAKER_06:
Nice.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, I don't know.

I'm not sure what the difference is really between collective intelligence and collective behavior.

There's this cool diagram, collective behavior and collective intelligence.

And it shows cooperation and coordination as essential to collective intelligence.

But it also then like that, those are both behavior, cooperation and coordination.

And then what's left is cognition.

And so it's cognition intelligence or like what is cognition?

Anybody have any like thoughts on that?

Marco, I know your background is neuroscience.

So let's let Daniel think, and then I'm going to put you on the spot.


SPEAKER_00:
studying collective systems it always struck me as interesting because the organism is a collective of cells and so it's more like an approach that we take to any system to see it as arising from interactions at an even lower level and so when i look at these very human centric um

Thought maps, informal thought maps.

It includes things that, you know, open source software, P2P, business, those are human centric.

And so it ends up muddying the waters and introducing a lot of psychology and game theory and terms that aren't like distinct, like is cooperation distinct from a coordination?

And that's one reason why having a perception, cognition, action model

even though it comes across as very austere and distant from the phenomena that we want to explain, like coordination, cooperation, and cognition, having such an austere but scalable and flexible model helps us get at these terms without presupposing them as natural things that exist in the world.

So we get to just model what is on the ground happening, like with the ants or on the ground in another context, and then ask how our definition or parameterization or formalization of coordination and cooperation are coexisting as descriptions of the process that we're specifying at the actual proximate mechanism level.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

Stephen and then Marco.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that challenge of these things having a psychological or folk psychological or cultural labeling is limiting.

And by stepping back from that, which in some ways creates more uncertainty, I could say that it seems more austere.

But it's more austere because it is less clear initially.

But the benefit of being less clear

And this actually ties in a bit with some of the infusion space work that I've been working on.

It makes it more nascent.

With active inference, it gives that holding container.

So by being more nascent, you've got more ability to then proceed again with another type of potentially more naturalistic framework and not being tied to a naturalistic framework

based on language and all the distortions that can come from that.

So I think that that's a really big part of what makes it useful.


SPEAKER_03:
No, thanks.

These are all super good points, and I agree completely.

And I think that this is also recognized in psychology that there is a tendency to attribute all kinds of terms to different brain areas.

For example, like the prefrontal cortex, there are more functions assigned to it that it could possibly hold.

For example, it could

find papers that identify the location of stock trading behavior.

And these are clearly human invented terms, and there is no reason why they should have an expression in the brain.

And so I think

A nicer way of thinking about this, and I think you mentioned it before, is this dynamic between segregation and integration.

So sometimes it makes sense to be focused on a particular task.

Everyone, let's say, you know, without lots of distractions, you are very efficient at performing one particular task.

But that might not be the most creative mode of operation where you might rather want to have lots of different brain regions simultaneously interacting with each other and exchanging lots of information.

That's not efficient, but it's very integrative.

So neither of those extremes is probably viable by themselves.

But if you have a good, flexible way of moving between segregation and integration, you can be very much task oriented, specific, but you can also be creative and incorporate lots of different information.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
It's a good point, Marco.

And also that meta task of appropriately choosing how to shift tasks is framed as a type of mental action in the nested active inference, the deep active inference formalism.

So we can actually think about that shifting between different affordances at the attentional level and

as another kind of action selection task that uses this same perception, cognition and action framework.

So, and I agree as well, Steven, it does start with a more atomic germ.

It's more nascent.

And that's what allows us to map and bridge and compose.

if we try to put too much meaning into the lowest level, we actually constrain how tall the buildings that we can build are.

And Douglas Hofstadter talks about this in the context of reflexive computer systems, brains, and ant colonies, just today as it was in 1979, three of the most important systems to understand, and gets at in all of those systems, how the lowest level

Like the interactions among nest mates themselves or the letters, they cannot have meaning in the way that, for example, words do.

Because if you load all the meaning of words onto phonemes, you can't compose sentences.

And it just is very interesting how even though, of course, we want that meaning, we have to actually take a dip into using pieces that are sub-meaningful in order to have flexible meaning.

Because if you just try to run straight for the meaning, you're going to end up with a very constrained system that might have the one function or meaning that you want to encode, but it won't have the ability to reflect or to generate novel meaning.


SPEAKER_05:
Nice.

So just in the last few minutes, I just want to thank Daniel for taking the time out to discuss this awesome paper with us, which I've been really wanting to discuss for several months.

And hopefully he'll be back next week with more conversations about active inference.

And Marco, welcome.

It was really nice to have you here.

And so just if anybody wants to give a final thought on this paper or some stuff that they're excited to talk about next week.


SPEAKER_03:
Well, thanks a lot.

This was really awesome.

And I learned a lot there.

There are also lots of references, I think that I need to check out now that you mentioned.

And yeah, really, thanks a lot for the paper and for presenting today.


SPEAKER_04:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just to mirror what Marco says and also welcome Marco.

Thanks for joining us.

Really, really enjoyed the different avenues and actually the ability for it to keep coming back to something which could hold those different branches, which is quite nice.

So we saw an ability to come back to and reintegrate a lot of different ideas.

So that was really nice.

So let's look forward to keeping that going.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool, Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, thanks everyone for joining and Blue for excellent facilitator and broadcaster role.

I think for 29.2, what might be awesome other than having some novel nest mates on the stream and in the live chat

What might be cool would be like to lay out some of these analogies that we've been exploring.

Like, okay, agent and environment.

All right, that's nestmate and pheromone density.

There's like the environment that you can control.

And then there's sort of the abiotic environment or there's the parts of the environment that are outside of the affordance of niche modification, like the thunderstorm environment.

Okay, so maybe having that kind of a table would help us align a lot of the systems that we've been talking about.

So ants, computers, brains, societies, other systems that people care about.

That's kind of like us preemptively foraging.

maybe laying down the inkling of some trails, because just like a few years ago when I was deep in the ant game, seeing that there was a way to bridge active inference and ant research in potentially a new way, maybe someone's going to go, oh, I mean, architecture?

I do that every day, and I've been looking for a way to inroad active inference.

or another way that maybe we could help scaffold somebody else's research, because I think the stigmargic modeling and a lot of these discussions go to a lot of systems and things that people are already working on.

So that would be awesome to talk about in 29.2 and to build momentum going forward.


SPEAKER_05:
Awesome.

Well, thank you again, everyone.

And we were looking forward to our discussion next week.

So get in touch if you are watching on the live stream and want to participate.


SPEAKER_06:
Bye.

## Z4S5JVoeGBw

SPEAKER_02:
Welcome to the Active Inference Lab live stream number 29.2.

Today is September 28th, 2021, and we will be discussing the paper Active Inference, an active inference framework for ant colony behavior.

And today we are here with the first author, Daniel Friedman.

The Active Inference Lab is a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at all of the links shown here.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve upon our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we will be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

Here at the short link, you can find all of the upcoming and recent live streams that we have done.

So please get in touch if you would like to participate.

Today, our goal is to discuss the paper that we just said active in France.

And we are going to do some different papers in the upcoming weeks.

Like I said, get in touch if you want to participate.

We're just going to introduce ourselves and go through a little bit of warming up.

I am Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant from New Mexico, and I'll pass it to Daniel.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Blue, for facilitating.

I'm Daniel, and I'm a researcher in California.

And I guess I'll start with what I'm excited about today.

I was just excited that in 29.1, we could sort of forge out in a lot of different directions and make some initial trails to a few different ideas.

And then now in the 29.2, maybe we can develop some of those threads slash trails and maybe get some of it down in writing.

So it should look pretty good.


SPEAKER_02:
Nice.

Yeah, I'm excited, too.

There are some questions that I've been mulling over over the last week, and so I'm kind of excited to delve into those and also into the code for the model today if we have time.

Being that it's just us, I think we might get there.

Well, maybe more people will join.


SPEAKER_00:
There might be a little bit of lag.

I'm not sure.

So you might want to check that.


SPEAKER_02:
OK.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
I don't know if it's my internet.

So the big question of this paper is how can a group of active inference agents solve complex group forging problems?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, first one I'll say is if you're recording it locally, as well as streaming, then we can always upload a high-quality recording.

And it does sort of bear on this big question.

This is a quote from the paper, and that's sort of the big question in collective behavioral studies, which is, okay, if...

if each agent if each subunit of the system had all the information needed well then there wouldn't necessarily be a challenge for coordination it's like if if it already knew what to do then it would be a challenge but how do systems make adaptive decisions when subunits don't have all the information so in the case of an online team each person's only seeing a different

part of the picture in the case the ants they're each in a little bit different part of their niche but those are some of the similarities which is that each nestmate is only going to be experiencing its local environment and um we want to have colonies that work so welcome steven maybe you can say hello while blue is just testing some stuff out oh great yeah good morning um


SPEAKER_01:
well, in North America anyway.

Yeah, I'm based in Toronto, and I work with communities and sort of systemic coaching approaches, and I'm very interested in how active influence scales in different ways.

So even though this is about small things, it's also about lots of small things.

So I'm going to pass to this person.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, your audio also just had some weirdness.

Steve, maybe talk directly into it.

Oh, okay.

Is that better?

Yeah.

Oh, okay.

But you mentioned scaling in the small.

So one funny thought, again, this picture is from the ants that I was studying for five years in Arizona.

And yes, the nestmate looks like a tiny guy, like a small ant.

But then we know that these colonies can live for 20, 30 plus years.

They're also several meters under the ground.

And they weigh, you know, dozens of kilograms.

So then I'm thinking, okay, it's a similar age, weight, and height to myself.

And it's subdued.

Let's see.


SPEAKER_02:
How's that?

Is it any better?


SPEAKER_00:
It still is not doing anything.

I just reopened it.

But if it's not, yeah.

Okay, now it's just the slides.

Or just the Jitsi.

So it looks like it's working now.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, perfect.

Yeah, it's the slides open also.

It just is too much.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

Yeah.

Welcome back, everybody.

Fun times.

The show goes on.

Foraging never stops.


SPEAKER_02:
It does.

And Stephen will rejoin us, hopefully.

He's having audio issues also.

It's a good day for technical mishaps.

We're having rainy weather in New Mexico, which never, ever happens.

So all of the ants are underground hiding, and the internet does not want to cooperate.

Apparently, this is so...

All right, so speaking of multi scale integration and and across systems as happens in ants and in the ant colony.

So we talked about making this table last time.

And so here, like what, how is each system related to

the agent, the niche, the interaction, and the stigma of you.

So we started this table.

Do you want to maybe take us through what you've started here, Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, um, see if you can get the slides again, because it's not going to be visible at all on the stream.


SPEAKER_02:
Okay, I can also switch.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I can also do that.

Um, so a lot of informal analogies and connections were being drawn amongst different systems.

And that's kind of what complexity and systems thinking and active inference is about, like finding patterns across systems.

So

Maybe there's other ways to break it up, but at least one way we could at least start to classify and find similarities and differences between different systems would be this way with the columns.

So we have the system of interest, like the int colony is a system of interest.

Then we can think about what is the agent level?

What is the subunit level?

And that might be the level where the active inference agent is being specified.

We then have the niche that the agent is operating in.

So that's the generative process that's presenting observations or outcomes to the agent, which is embodying a generative model.

So that's related to this generative process versus generative model distinction.

The process actually outputs the temperature or the observations, whereas the generative model is a model of the process.

And then there's two kinds of interactions that are possible.

So there's sort of a transient interaction.

that might be amongst agents.

Welcome back, Steven.

There's the transient interactions amongst agents.

And in the case of the ants, that's like an antennal contact.

And then there's the stigmergic interactions where there's a modification of the niche.

And so sometimes it helps to think about these interactions amongst agents that are without memory.

as being like the transient horizontal interactions, like the common example of the bird flock.

Those are the birds looking at each other.

They're interactions amongst agents that modify the likelihood of agents doing certain future behaviors, but they don't leave a trace on the environment.

And that can be contrasted with Stigmargic,

or niche modification behaviors, which are defined by being the ones that do leave a trace on the environment.

So maybe we'll explore different sections today, but we can always say, okay, let's return to slide eight and let's add a row.

What's a system of interest?

Let's add a column or let's fill in some columns.

So, so far we have ant colony, brain and internet slash computer ABCs.

GEB, the systems that matter.

Stephen, what would be a fun system to throw into this mix and to look for parallelisms among?


SPEAKER_03:
We can't hear you, Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, we still don't hear you, Stephen.

Yeah, your microphone's definitely not working.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.


SPEAKER_02:
So I started filling in for brain and, you know, it all really is so dependent on what the, what level you want to evaluate.

Right.

So, you know, on one level, there's like the little sub regions of the brain and you took us through, I think in the dog zero video, a very nice example for ants that has been kind of done.

describing the different like organoids or substructures within the brain because definitely there are structures that all have different functions like the cerebellum is motor function primarily and you know the cortex is like higher level thought and and so there's you know all these different sub regions of the brain but then also at the cellular level there are interactions you know that that

expand those regions that are from, you know, the cellular cellular level.

Um, and what is the, what the niches or the interaction, um, you know, might, might be different depending on like the, the cells are responsible for driving interactions between the organoids.

So I'm not sure what the level of, um, of, uh,

of the level of analysis, the right one is.

And then stigmatizing and modification, I think about, you know, long-term potentiation and like adaptation within the brain is very, maybe not stigmatizing, but it's a really important modification, I think, and sensitivity to different neurotransmitters and things like that.


SPEAKER_00:
Blue, it's still really lagging.

Can you just stop streaming?

And I'm going to pick it up on my side, okay?

Go for it.

So stop the streaming and then just let me know when you did it.

Let's see how this... Okay, let's see what happens.

This could be very, very interesting to do the live hack like this.

Okay, YouTube, we're going to wait for it to catch up.

Sorry, everybody.

So it goes.

Okay, wow.

We just hot swapped...

Livestream feeds.

So we're back in the game.


SPEAKER_02:
No level of preparation can prepare for laggy internet, I suppose.


SPEAKER_00:
No, and it's like half the time of mine and half the time on your side.

But if you're watching live, definitely add any comments or questions because we're just going to be kind of exploring and chilling today.

But continue to facilitate.

I'll just be broadcast or roll.


SPEAKER_02:
Cool.

So the...

Yeah, we were talking about the brain and the interaction and the sigmoid G and then for the internet, I don't know.

What do you think is the, is the agent or what, what is the subunit of the internet?

Like, is it each server or what, where do you have the subunit at Daniel or Steven?

What do you guys think?


SPEAKER_01:
Hmm.

Well, so this sort of ties into what they might say in research, you know, unit of analysis as well, but that's not necessarily quite the same thing as an agent.

I suppose on the internet, ultimately, it's whoever's triggering choices, right?

um in the system um which is normally a yeah it's normally a person um interacting with the screen in some way um i think the overwhelming amount of interactions on the internet are probably not human driven because any human interaction is going to trigger


SPEAKER_00:
truly a vast number of communications amongst other systems inside of the computer and probably remotely.

So maybe, and I think this is one of the unique challenges, but also interesting areas is like the internet is a cyber physical system.

So we could have one model where the agent, like the subunit are physical devices.

So we kind of draw

the blanket, we focus on the partitioning around a physical object, like internet of things.

We have partitionings around things.

We could also have a human centered partitioning.

So partitioning around humans, but then there's a lot of,

gray space in between the humans a lot of links that aren't human between the human links and then another approach might be purely informational or computational and seeing the agents as software agents but i think that interface where how will we talk about the software and the hardware agents coming together is where the internet of things is developing and what it's coming to mean


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, one thing you could think about there also is when, say, for instance, I make a choice or I do something on the Internet and there's a whole load of there's a cascade of other things going on through the different routers and the servers, etc.

Is that more like the pheromone trial?

that sort of dissipates off into the distance leaving records and how much of it's like other agents initiating because often you know every time you do something to some extent yeah databases might update um however and this may change to what extent that is alive is another question

You know, is it sort of a computational form of niche modification that's going on in most cases in terms of the internet?

But what they're trying to do, because it's that idea of the battle for your mind, they're trying to make it so that in most cases the user has less thinking to do.

in terms of the choices they make and the design.

There's a great book in web design called Don't Make Me Think.

And the idea is that you go somewhere and it's almost obvious what you need to do.

A bit like when you pick up a newspaper, you know that you're just going to turn the pages.

So how much of all this architecture in the background is to support giving you what you expect to be given when you expect to be given it?

And how much of it is...

Which, you know, how much of it is actually what you might term an agent with some sort of teleology?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, you mentioned expectation there, and expectation is something that agents engage in.

So maybe it's even, we could keep on forking this off, but what do we know from the active inference ontology?

What defines an agent?

external states blanket states internal generative model what does the internal generative model entail well it includes predictions about external states it includes policy affordances it includes preferences it includes expectations over some of these things as well so when we say agents

We can be referring to the whole Markov decision process or other ways of viewing the active agents.

And then the expectations of the agent are really important because it's not just that psychologically it's going to determine whether the agent likes it or not, but it helps us connect these systems like the ant colony and subunits of the brain.

So we don't need to use only the psychological interpretation.

But then we can have a psychological interpretation where one seems warranted, given the system of interest.

But also we're going to be able to compare that and look for similar functional features in systems without getting into just some sort of abstract debate over whether it's alive or whether it's certain feels a certain way to be that system.


SPEAKER_02:
So, Daniel, you brought up the generative model, and I was just going to bring it up right before this.

And so I've been really

you know, thinking a lot about the generative model and like, where is the generative model, which is like, I think probably my favorite podcast episode that I've ever cut is going to come out next week.

And it talks about like the location of the generative model.

And so, you know, it doesn't necessarily have to have a location.

because it's like software right like so i mean that yeah there's like a copy of the software running on disk maybe maybe it's in the cloud like it does but it doesn't matter because it's the program that's running so the location of the program is is almost not even relevant um so i just i think about like what is the generative model of the internet right like what does that look like


SPEAKER_00:
great question um inactivism for cyber physical systems and embodiment uh in encodement maybe there's some analogous term to what would describe what we call 4e in the embodied extended encultured etc for digital systems because they do have important attributes that

in a strange way, almost suggests that some of these features that are suggested to be quintessentially related to having a body and embodiment also exist for software.


SPEAKER_01:
Could I put in something onto that?

Say we think about, you've got the active inference generative model, but say you've got an active niche modification model.

algorithm so ie it's still working off the agents being making choices but what's happening is so for instance say you've got abc testing happening on a website so basically they send out three different campaigns with three different types of profiles now the user makes choices

Based on how the user makes a choice, they may be across the whole market.

The ABC choices might get modified in that niche.

But eventually, maybe then actual clients get sent down certain routes.

um i mean a classic case of this is also what happens with those in-store cards because i actually ended up going i didn't get go for it you know i had an interview with the nectar card people in the uk once and they uh they do these cards that you get in store and basically i think it worked out they have like a million permutations of offer that they can give you based on what your different buying options are so in a way they're kind of

But they only serve you up then whatever you see one of those, right?

You don't see what all the other people are getting.

And some of them are small changes.

Some of them might be bigger changes.

So in some ways, it's like the niche is modifying to the agent's adaptive behavior.

But the actual niche isn't necessarily doing adaptive active inference.

There may be some sort of active inference in a more kind of non-living way.


SPEAKER_00:
There might be, we'll probably have better words and ontologically informed ways of talking about it, but there's kind of like low bar active inference or like austere active inference that is just any input output structure.

it's going to be able to be fit into something like a partially observable Markov decision process.

So whatever it is that the niche is doing, it's emitting observations so we can model it under this certain low-bar active inference versus the sort of anti-dissipative, truly cognitive, strategic active inference and

Also, there's no reason why we can't have hybrid models where there's like active inference agents in a niche that isn't an active inference agent.

So like in this ANT model, the niche is just a landscape of pheromone densities with a random dissipation factor.

So that external niche could be made very much more complicated

and the observations that it passes back to the agents could be like customized to them.

And that could be calculated by an active inference niche or not.

And that's sort of the extremely interesting work of Axel, Constant, and others with some type of symmetry occurring with the agent and the niche jointly inferring each other.

So like what is the niche's generative model of the organism?

What is the internet's generative model of the user?

So it's interesting questions.


SPEAKER_02:
I love that idea of symmetry, especially between the agent and the niche and its relationship or potential relationship to the kind of Gaia theory that the niche has to expect or have an expectation of the organism that's going to interact with it or create it or modify it or exploit it in some way in order for there to be some kind of reciprocal interaction there.

So super nice.

Maybe we can come back to looking at this table and maybe think of other systems that might be interesting to go through and move on to some of the questions for 29.2.

But wait, before we go to this one, I want to go to this one.

Hold on.

So we were talking about the role of dopamine last time.


SPEAKER_00:
Which slide?


SPEAKER_02:
Sorry, this is slide... I skipped to... Sorry, I can't see.


SPEAKER_01:
I think it's number seven.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, number 11.

Okay.

So...

So we were talking about last time, the role of dopamine and like influencing the affordances.

And this really kind of speaks to the role of reward in a generative model.

And so, you know, we talk about one of the beautiful things about active inference is it kind of changes the reward structure in the model because, you know, there's some kind of reward that's given to

you know, actually finding the food, right?

So there's some reward for finding the food, but also, and even in this model, so the reward structure has changed, right?

So it's not just about finding the food.

And maybe this is a good opportunity to look through the code maybe as well.

But, you know, we think about the change in the reward structure and we place some value on the epistemic, you know, the knowledge about the model of the world.

So if we can build a more precise model of the world, we can also gain more food overall.

So I don't know if you guys have comments on that.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, Stephen, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think also, as well as, like you say, building that model of the world becomes, it's an action model, okay?

So it can be what might seem factually spurious but practically useful, you know?

So it may be really useful to have some bizarre ritual about how to get on a soccer pitch and try and kick the ball, right?

But if it does something better than what you're doing otherwise, go for it.


SPEAKER_00:
And I think the challenge comes with increasingly esoteric rituals if they're not related to the actual causal structure of the world.

If they work for a moment, they're not going to be adaptive.

Because if your only strategy is, you know, praying to the kicking God instead of practicing, it might work or it might indirectly induce some sort of outcome.

But is that a long-term strategy?

but agree that the generative model is including a model of action.

It's not just about getting precision about how things are out there, because what ultimately matters is getting precision on our actions.

And then there's sort of these two

parallel paths or two intertwining paths, which is, do we take a reward centered approach?

Is behavior dominated by reward?

And then the other side of the reward coin is like the punishment aversion.

So carrot and the stick, that's sort of a sister road, two lane road.

Do we pursue reward or do we avoid regret and suffering?

And then a third road is this

uncertainty minimization approach.

So I pasted in this paper by Colombo, explanatory pluralism, and they review three prominent hypotheses of dopamine activity.

So anhedonia, which is

unpleasurable states incentive salience and reward prediction errors and i i think this is a really fascinating paper and it does apply to the ant context because they make a very specific system point talking about the role of dopamine in the mammalian brain reviewing empirical evidence and then also pull back to the broader implications for the philosophy of science

So they conclude that the evidence currently vindicates explanatory pluralism.

In other words, these explanations do not subsume or knock out each other.

There's a pluralism.

There's multiple explanations that exist that capture different parts of how the system really works.

The vindication implies that grand unified claims of the advocates of the PTB are unwarranted.

We can look at what that is again, but more generally, we suggest that the form of scientific progress in the cognitive sciences is unlikely to be a single overarching grand unified theory.

Little possible indirect evidence

reference to those who claim that the value or the utility of, for example, the free energy principle or active inference is just simply that it explains everything.

I don't need to even say any more or detail where I used it or show you the code or show you that it's better than another model.

The fact that this model I can fit everything into

is the utility and it will subsume other models and other frameworks now that's a contentious point that has to be either empirically supported or not but it just is so interesting how dopamine as reward molecule or the other side of that coin with the punishment or as a precision molecule the empirical evidence alone

are not enough to disambiguate that.

And so, you know, trust the data, let the data speak.

But then this is just showing us a kind of real time that our models of the world get projected as we do sensemaking on the experimental outcomes.

And it's not always as clear as it seems.


SPEAKER_02:
Well, you know, it just reminds me like so I mean, just from a very literal sense, if we think about dopamine as

reward for minimizing prediction error like how much do we all like to be right like all of us so i mean like just just for being correct like that in in and of itself is a huge like dopamine reward and i think about like i'm a super ultra nerd and so i i geek out on things like difficult math problems or solving a rubik's cube or or these kinds of things and i'm just like

Finally, when I get, or even code, right?

Finally, when the code runs, there's this huge, something that you've been working on for a really long time, it's a huge dopamine rush for me, which is why I keep going back to doing these kinds of things.

But ultimately, that's a prediction error reward.

So it's interesting to think about that.


SPEAKER_00:
And here's sort of the two ways that they're phrased and it's somewhat subtle, but I think it gets at the difference between reinforcement learning and active inference.

Is there a drive for being right and then we prefer to be certain?

Or is the drive for certainty and then there's a preference over being right or being accurate?

So are there situations where it actually brings us solace

even though the direction of the outcome isn't what we expected or isn't what on some sense conversation is what we prefer, but actually the fact that we're able to have certainty outweighs the fact that the outcome went the way it went.

So, and maybe there's other phrasings too, but it's just, again, which one do we put in the driver's seat, precision or reward?


SPEAKER_02:
Well, so what's the difference between being certain and being correct?

Like being right and being certain?

Like, okay, if I'm really certain, but then that certainty is unwarranted, then that's when I'm wrong.

But then I have this prediction error gap, right?

So either way, so what's the difference really between being certain and being correct?


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think one, if I could just jump in there, I think one thing that's really interesting is if everything's based on energy minimization, like you've got, you've got a process, you're going to keep doing it.

And it's optimizing to make it basically, if I use less energy,

I'm being more efficient, I'm being faster, I'm being smoother.

So it always seems like, yeah, go for the reward.

The thing is, though, once you get into something where it's more complex or uncertain, you know, the idea, and they talk about this now, actually, there's a whole area in...

development work and design thinking called failing forward fail forward so the idea is fail fast fail quick but part of this is like in you know and i always say within ethical bounds right because it might be great for the designer as long as it's not a community member being sort of

being frustrated by this but but it makes sense in the sense that and i don't think reinforcement learning can really account for this is the benefit of doing something because it might be something which doesn't work but now you can take from it it's almost like you're giving yourself a sample of the counterfactuals

in a way by something going wrong, but you don't, obviously we can then break it apart and say, well, there might be something right still in that, you know, and some bits which are more wrong and we can sort of do stuff with that information.


SPEAKER_00:
almost like succeeding forward would be better than failing forward.

I mean, failing forward has this psychological benefit of helping people recognize that it's okay to not get it right the first time and just get something on the paper and we'll iterate from there.

So the rhetoric of fail forward makes sense, but

having something that's even positive like succeed forward or win forward or contribute forward or learn forward or develop forward those actually capture the functional spirit that um is here and let's think about how that relates to blue's question so what's the difference between being certain and correct so there could probably be many takes on this but i thought of this classic science textbook

you know, when they give you the science textbook, the difference between accuracy and precision.

Now, in many cases, this also is not coming from the active inference ontology.

So they may be using these terms in a slightly different way, but the point is we're getting at two complimentary components of precision.

and um basically uh we can see that there's these two off diagonals the top left and the bottom right so high accuracy high precision it's like your average is on target so that's the accuracy is where you're aiming at accuracy aim and then the precision is referring to the tightness of the distribution around that mean

so you could have high accuracy like it's always at the bullseye but the precision is low or the uncertainty the spread is high you could also have like a thermometer with it giving you very tight readings high precision but it's systematically biased in a certain direction and um

This is just one way to get at two different aspects.

Now we've seen this in a few different cases in variational inference as being the difference between the expectations, the means of the distributions.

That's like the accuracy.

And then the precision is like the variance of that distribution.

So you could have a very tight distribution, the Q distribution very tight and close to the P distribution.

That would be accurate and precise.

You could also have a really overfit, overconfident model that is just simply quite divergent from the underlying P distribution.

So which one is being optimized?

Are we trying to aim for a tight scatter and then second order is we want it to be in the middle?

Or do we aim for the middle and then the second order is we want them to be accurate?

Steven?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, that that that question is a good one.

And I think distinguish because often they might get conflated in many ways.

But it's good to pull apart precision and accuracy because it is a, you know, you could have, you know, you could be very precise in the fuzzy set that you have, and you could, but it could still be fuzzy, you could have something

like you say, more accurate, but it moves around a lot.

And I think that that's an important distinction that might be lost in many cases.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, and it's actually one reason why it's important to sort of stick with the uncertainty and pass the estimate, the state estimate, as well as like the uncertainty around a state estimate, pass that through.

Because if you collapse the uncertainty,

and you treat all estimates as being equally precise, there's this whole dimension of the data that has been dropped.

For example, in gene expression analysis, sometimes there's uncertainty over whether a gene is differentially expressed or not.

Like it has a distribution and you pick some cutoff.

But then sometimes people take the genes on one side of that line and then they just move forward with them like these are the differentially expressed genes as if it was a discrete categorization.

They take a continuum and then discretize it, which makes certain kinds of analyses really simple or straightforward.

But a whole aspect of the variability of the data has been completely crunched out.

Steven?

Steven?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and this also then ties into scale as well.

You could, and how much, so like you mentioned the thermometer, so the thermometer gives a fairly

well fairly precise sense of the of the reading it's fairly consistent and it's averaging out the average is fairly relatively accurate in terms of the average but it's not going to give you the range or the

the spread within that and that that can apply to a number of things and then you as you go down to less and less if you for instance i suppose like you would say if someone's purely looking at one ant or one ant's behavior at a time then you you might have this sense of i'm being very accurate in terms of my ant analysis so to speak however at the level of the

you know, the larger colony, you're not as accurate, you know, so there's some interesting sort of scale things that can't be avoided really.


SPEAKER_00:
Are ants accurate and or are ants precise, the nest mates?

So it's almost like maybe we could think of them as being high accuracy but low precision.

Like, let's just imagine what that would be like for the colony.

So each forager is in the neighborhood of making adequate foraging decisions, but there's a lot of noise around that.

So over thousands of interactions and foraging trips...

you're going to end up getting a lot of your points in the middle.

So it's cheap because it's lower precision, so you can have simpler subunits, but it's centered around the target.

Whereas if you have it centered over something that's not the target, it's going to be suboptimally adaptive for the colony.

But I think ants just show that it's not about making every single action perfectly...

the right one, it's about being right more often than not, and then just doing it many, many, many times, which is related to that sort of develop slash fails slash succeed forward.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm sorry, go ahead, Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Just one thing.

I think this is also useful just in the sense of

And it's almost implicit with the agent-based modeling approaches that get used in biology.

But it's quite interesting in the sense that that brings in that intersubjective piece.

What are these ants trying to do, for instance?

How are they trying to organize?

What's going on?

Rather than

the first person perspective.

What do I see?

What's my perspective on the ant as an observer, which might be more psychological in our world?

Or what is it that I see the group doing on average, like the temperature?

But when you start to get into agent-based approaches, it does allow this second person perspective

stuff to happen which is really i know in psychology is the missing piece really in a lot of cases so um you know how this how this in a way also ties into thinking about agents rather than thinking about what i see someone or something doing from the outside and inferring from their behaviors externally


SPEAKER_02:
qualitatively sets up a different type of experiment or modeling so I wonder about the different scales like as we scale from the nest mate to the colony like are are they comparable like are they asking the same question like the colony wants to know like will there be enough food

And the forager never asks that question.

The forager always wants to know, where is the food?

So they're asking very different kinds of questions, because the forager knows, it has no uncertainty that its job is to find food.

And so the colony wants to have enough food, but the forager always wants to get the food.

And I wonder how this kind of asking different questions scales to things like the brain and components of the brain, like

or the internet and components of the internet like like what are is is what defines a scale whether we're asking the the same question or not like or is it the goal of the system that defines the scale of the system i don't know it just made me think of that yeah yeah i mean that's a good that's a really good point i mean yeah you could if you're starting to look from the agent


SPEAKER_01:
And you could even think about that in the brain.

Yeah, if different parts of the brain are foraging information, so it's not like that would explain a little bit why you have these kind of parts.

Different parts of the brain have different personality

um queries going on even when certain parts of the brain get sort of put to sleep so to speak so um rather than yeah i mean that could be that could explain and if they're if they're each working away i mean like a colony um and yeah who which one is in some of them get to be in the driving seat

And some just, yeah, some get to ask different questions or some get to sort of have their question to influence other questions.

And some of them just get on and do their thing, if that makes sense.

You're a forager.

Basically, you're going to forage, right?

That's the deal.

But someone else, it might be like, I'm hungry, right?


SPEAKER_00:
you gotta forage more um right come on oh just i i rapidly assembling some image memes it actually breaks down well into the chess and other fields other serious games of tactics and strategy

So strategy, so like Blue, your question, the colony was asking, do we slash I, we don't know what pronouns the colony uses.

Do we slash I have enough food?

It's as if it's asking that question.

Does it identify as a entity, an eye, or does it identify as an ensemble?

We don't know.

But then the Nesme is asking the more tactical and action-oriented question, which at a first pass is like, where is the food?

But we know that...

inactive inference what matters isn't just like simply inference on the location of the food out there but what matters is inference on our action selection for how we're going to get that food or how we're going to implement a strategy that has a good trade-off of us finding it so like here chess meme um

Tactics mean doing what you can with what you have.

So like whatever pieces are on the board, you're gonna have to do some sort of action selection for your next move.

Here, strategy requires thought, tactics require observation.

So that's kind of interesting because observation is one of our terms in the ontology, like the agent is receiving observation.

Without observations, tactics cannot be implemented.

And then strategy is requiring mental action, just like our previous discussions in 28.

The thought is actually the planning over observation strategies.

uh nice double blue and um there's other definitions of strategy and tactics and how they're similar or different so that's just kind of like cool that um it's a way to think about maybe not just that are the levels asking different or the same questions but might levels be defined or delineated by the difference in the questions that they ask

with independent of the spatial size of the subunit, the more tactical is like more agent level.

And then the more strategic requiring reflection or accumulative culture or mental action, that level is being implemented by higher and higher nestings.

Wait, Blue, you're muted because you went down to just one.


SPEAKER_02:
Can you hear me?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
Perfect.

I went down to just one so you can share the memes with us because I'm missing out on the meme action and I can't stand it a little bit.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm so sorry.


SPEAKER_02:
So speaking of action and different levels, so this is something that I've really been thinking about over the course of the last week.

This is the next question on this slide 11.

is this prospect of intergenerational stigmergy.

And I just wonder, as we were both foraging for memes and slide content, like creating the 29.0, we have this internet, right?

And so we just Google, search for whatever.

And informational foraging, I know, is not the same as maybe ants foraging for food.

But, you know, we're both foraging and we come across the same kind of content and ended up like putting it into the 29.0 in different ways, in different places.

And I just wonder, you know, there's this concept of intergenerational stigmatry that's very, and I wonder if this is human centric or if there are other examples of this in animal kingdom and perhaps among ants.

I know, Daniel, we've talked at length about

the different foraging habits for example of different um different foraging habits of different species or of the same species of amp with different colonies and so where do they get this habit like to forge differently like at different times of the day or whatever and and it spans generations and so is there some trace left in the environment like humans we leave traces for the next generation i mean we directly do some cumulative cultural evolution transfer

And there are other species I know that teach like dolphins, I know teach like some foraging habits and so forth.

So what other examples do we have of this kind of intergenerational stigmergy or like, you know, we leave traces like the time capsule of, you know, like what to find like every decade we open up the time capsule from.

you know, whatever the previous decade was and find things like eight tracks and like whatever things that are put in the time capsule that are just like, Oh, look way back in the day.

Um, so I don't know, what do you think about that?

Um, just relative to ants and relative to this intergenerational stigmergy and the different foraging habits of colonies from the same species?


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

And, uh,

where do the priors for foraging come from?

And then to what extent is there scaffolding of one nestmate in their foraging activity by older nestmates, which is actually within a generation, that's like sort of some skin cells being scaffolded by previous skin cells.

It's like, if you just kill all the foragers of a colony,

foragers that step into those roles will perform sub optimally that's actually related to colony collapse in the honeybees so there's some element of like they have an inkling of how to adapt their foraging yet um also there's flexibility um i mean

It just makes me think of how we could actually study it, like putting nest mates in different environments or having one colony and splitting it and training it a certain way and then reintegrating them and seeing if...

what mattered more was like the environment at that generation or whether it was possible to have epigenomic or genomic changes that sort of lock in and shape foraging.

And then on 12, you know, I'm doing a little live meme modification.

like forging is not an act but a habit with a probably misattributed aristotle quote so it's almost like forging is not an act it's a policy it's a policy over specific motor actions uh but yeah the intergenerational part is very interesting and it

I'm just thinking if there's other true intergenerational ant scaffolding, one example not in foraging is like when a leaf cutter ant queen goes on her nuptial flight, she takes a little sub sample of the fungal garden and uses that to start the next generation, which actually I think relates to the second point you had about 30.


SPEAKER_02:
So that's super interesting.

And also, um,

directly related to the microbe transfer, right?

Like you think about microbial transfer that happens like through the birth canal, like there's a difference between C-section delivered babies and babies that actually pass through the birth canal, just in terms of how they're inoculated as well as breastfed babies versus formula fed babies.

There's a huge like inoculation difference with your like just microbial flora.

And so that is the, and I wonder what, you know, this speaks to the holobiont concept.

Like we're not just humans.

We're humans inoculated with all kinds of things.

And maybe ants aren't just ants.

They're ants plus that fungal, and there's been studies on that fungus, like on the fungal composition, is it different from colony to colony?

Do you know?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
I know that one,

group in my previous lab, they isolated nest mates and then they treated them with antibiotics and changed their microbiome.

And others have also shown that there's a role for the microbiome in recognition.

So because it modifies the smell of the ants, that modifies how they recognize each other.

Maybe that's more like a dialect.

Like that's kind of how they recognize that they're in the very short time range, like in the same group or they're likely to be collaborative.

But I returned to eight to think about what you just described about like the body and the inheritance of microbial forms.

Like, is there a way to refer to that?

Human is the species, but then, you know, if humans contain and are multitudes,

You know, there's the body, there's the other life forms, there's social interactors.


SPEAKER_02:
Humans aren't the species, but the host, which ties in very nicely to our next live stream, which I'm very excited about, which with Matthew Sims, he's going to come and talk to us about

uh, the symbiosis between squid and Vibrio fischeri in the light organ, um, which is something near and dear to my heart.

I've worked in New Mexico.

I don't know.

Uh, how is this possible in, um, right upstairs, you know, you have those labs that like, you know, everybody in the lab and you guys can come and work and, um, like share equipment sometimes.

And so I knew this lab and our lab were very close, uh, the lab of Michelle Nishiguchi.

And she studied Vibrio fischeri and the light organ.

So I knew all these people doing directly related projects.

But it's a really cool concept that maybe we're all in some form of symbiosis.

And I know in mice, they have sterilized mice.

And the mice grow up totally neurotic, like mice lacking the microbiome-free mice.

They're completely neurotic and have way abnormal behavior.

And they've linked a lot of

you know, human behavior or human abnormal or abnormal behavior or neuroatypical behavior to microbiome stuff as well.

So, so it's really interesting to think about maybe we're all symbionts in some fashion.

I mean, and, and like when maybe we're not the species, but we're just the host.


SPEAKER_00:
Reminds me of Demetrius Bolas speaking about the through others we become ourselves and it was situating active inference in the dialectical tradition and you have a coming together

of different pieces and they don't reduce their distinction.

They actually become, especially over evolutionary time, more polarized.

Like the nuclear genome becomes more nuclear.

The mitochondrial genome becomes more reduced in mitochondrial or the host becomes on one trajectory and the parasite goes in the other.

They don't converge and equalize each other.

They end up becoming increasingly specialized parts

in a newly emergent type of system,

And then these multi-specified systems can be fragile because maybe now there's a failure mode of the part and then that causes the whole system to fail.

So like Bucky Fuller would always talk about how all cases of biological extinction are due to over-specialization.

Might be a bit of an overstatement, but that's sort of the idea is like generalists can deal with changing niches better.

because they're always able to hedge their bets amidst uncertainty and average out over all the different foraging investments.

Whereas a specialist does really well until they don't.

But in life, it's not just like you can do well most of the time and then you can fail sometimes.

Living systems need to be succeeding at least adequately all the time.

If any part of your body

was under producing ATP for like five minutes, it would get tissue damage.

So it's better to be adequate all the time, rather than hyper successful for even almost all the time.

And then what kinds of strategies are resilient amongst that kind of uncertainty and situation.


SPEAKER_02:
So about halfway through what you were saying, I wondered when we started having a political discussion.

Because it just really, you know, speaks to

specialization or maybe polarization, which we see in society.

So like, you know, we have these different factions or different like sub types or sub classes of people and biological systems that don't become more like one another.

They become more separate from one another.

And I think, you know, in the resounding echo chamber that is

you know, a self-similar political environment or class environment, you know, it becomes this echo chamber that, you know, just increases our certainty, right?

Increases the validity of our own model.

And it makes us question the model of others.

So I wonder, and this brings us back to what we're going to discuss with Matthew Sims next week.

Is that right?

Or is the generative model becoming more similar for the Vibrio fischeri and the squid?

Or is it becoming more different?

I just wonder.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So through interaction, do we become more similar or different?

Or what kinds of systems through interaction become more similar or different?

And then how can systems be more anti-fragile given that relationship amongst the subunits versus which failure modes are you de-risking on and which failure modes are you increasing the risk on?

So it's an interesting question.

I mean, it's not just political.

It is very broad question.

Blue, let's look at the code and maybe just scan through some sections of it and then start to see on 11, before we get to the code, is just like, what else could we include in an ant model?

Like this was, we talked about the natural history of the ant that we templated off of the formica species in the paper, but we used one pheromone.

We didn't have interactions.

We had such a sparse...

pulling over of features of ants into our model.

So that's why it's just like a introductory framework.

So what other pieces could exist for ants?

And we can kind of use the active inference breakdown of what perceptions could we add in, tactile interactions, other olfactory interactions, light, the intensity, the color, the polarization of light.

Another type of polarization.

What type of cognition could we add in?

So this was like a one step decision making ants.

It just makes a decision for the next time step based upon the local pheromone density.

what kind of cognitive processes actually exist in ants, or what kind might be interesting to see in different systems like memory, and then what actions exist.

Here we had a movement action affordance, any of the directions, and then we had sort of a pheromone deposit affordance,

that didn't actually have a specific control policy.

It was just an if-then.

If you already touched the seed, then you deposit pheromone.

If you're still looking for the seed, then you don't deposit pheromone.

So we can think, what are the perceptions, cognitions, and actions of the ants as currently modeled in the paper?

And then where can we go with that?

And then to go from that question about the simulation...

to meet the empirical data, the other side of the table, what kinds of ant data already exist?

There are several very fascinating databases that include genomics, gene expression, transcriptomic and epigenome or epigenomics data sets.

They're sparser for ants than they are for humans and mice, but they are out there and there will be more of them in the future.

What kind of behavioral data already exists?

Ethology, the study of animal behavior.

Video data, maybe they analyzed it under a certain framework, but now it could be readdressed.

And then like RFID and QR codes that can do semi-automated high throughput tracking.

So people attach RFID chips to honeybees and track their foraging activity.

And then we also have information on their ecology and morphology.

So features of which were not in our simulation.

So this is just this sort of prime looking at the code by asking like, how could the code be modified?

And then how could the world

already be seen as reaching out to us with these helpful pieces of data and then where are we going to be in the middle like what kind of model is going to connect the empirical data sets that do or could exist to the models that do or could exist and then what questions are most important because we want to be asking relevant questions and so it's better to be keeping the goals in mind as we look through everything

Okay.

Let me just re crop this window while I get the code up.

Anything you would just say on the overview or like general thoughts on the kind of multi-agent simulations or foraging simulations that you've made?


SPEAKER_02:
Uh, just, I have some questions about this simulation actually, or some, some things that I would think about to include as parameters, like in a dream simulation where we, you know, could, can simulate whatever with,

unlimited computational power and relative world data.

So I think that here I'm interested in nestmate interactions.

So I think that that would be something that would be interesting to model, like the different types of ants that exist, like the nursemaids and the foragers and the queen and the reproducers.

I can't remember, we went through all the different types of nestmates last time, but I would just be interested in kind of simulating how

As a colony, ants interact and function.

I know that that's like, you know, very, whatever, big.

And I mean, in most simulations that I've always done, it's like the same type of agent, right?

Like, so you give the agent different options, but it's never like,

this agent doesn't forage and this agent does, I don't know.

But I mean, I know that they do have different, people do do some modeling with different types of agents, but I just wonder what the compute power is and what the validity of that is.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Great.

Okay.

So we're gonna, um,

take a sort of a stepwise approach.

And one thing that I think will be fun is there's people who know way more about Python and coding than both of us, for sure, including Alec Chance and others.

And then there might be others for whom

they've learned about active inference or they've read a lot about it, maybe even looked at the math, but here is going to be where we see how it looks in code.

So there are these multiple languages and ways of communicating and learning by doing active inference, like natural language, math as a language,

programming as a language art as a language maybe there's other ways too but at the very least we know that we have natural language mathematical formalisms like the equations that we're always putting up and then here's the code those threads might be looking more similar or different as we start to learn more about like interactive notebooks and ways to integrate our language use

of the natural kind with the programming kind.

So we're gonna do kind of a step down.

First, we're gonna look at the config file.

So the README file in this case is not super informative, which is fine.

But the config files where we're going to start, that's going to tell us about like what kinds of variables and parameters matter.

Then we're going to look at figure one, and that's just sort of going to be like, okay, this is how you run it.

And then we're going to pull back to the ans.py and look at what functions and subroutines are actually defined inside the code.

So inside of the config file, it's only 30 lines long, 31 lines long.

and it has some pretty clearly defined variables that are being set.

And the idea is that all the parameters are stored in this file so that you can kind of hit play and then it will look to this config file.

We'll see where that happens in a second.

And so the first block relates to if you want to add the ants in a staggered fashion, how many time steps should happen between adding new ants in?

What's the location of where the ants should begin?

Nest factor, we can look at.

I'm not exactly sure.

It is here.

I'm not exactly sure what the nest factor has to do.

It might have to do with the distance of the nest.

But let's ask Alec on that one.

The grid is the size of the map.

So here is a 40 by 40.

And then here is a very interesting block.

It's the focal area, which is three by three.

So that's the grid around each nestmate.

It's just three cells by three cells.

And so this could be changed to, you know, like four by four or something like what happens when the ant has a broader range of perception than it might have for action.

And that's the action map.

And so those are the actions that can be undertaken.

relating to basically moving like down into the left or up into the right the food location and the size of the food are provided then the wall so that specifies like within the grid what is the shape of the maze inside of the map 24 and 25 describe the the number of discretized levels of pheromone that exist and then a factor that is the stochastic decay of the pheromone trail

And then here, the observation states, so like the O in the active inference model are defined as the number of pheromone levels.

So in this case, those are both one through 10 discrete models, but it's so interesting because it opens up the door for the generative process to differ from the generative model.

So like the observations,

there could be three categories of observation, low, medium, and high.

And so you could still have a continuous variable or a discretized variable in the world in the generative process, but the generative model could be over a reduced version of that, which might be all you need to know.

Maybe there's enough stochasticity such that just knowing if you're in high, medium, low tells you whether to put on a jacket or not.

You don't need five decimal points on the temperature.

And the number of action states is also reduced to the focal size, but just as mentioned, that could also diverge.

And then the length of the simulation, I think, is specified in 31.

So those are some of the parameters that exist just in the base simulation.

Some of the degrees of freedom that do exist, and that's even before introducing these other sorts of pieces that could exist.

Okay, any thoughts here before we go to figure one?


SPEAKER_02:
just like, you know, I mean, I always want to know like, why, like, why did you choose this?

Or like, did you play with the decay factor or did you play with like the length, the time steps?

I'm sure like maybe your viewers commented that as well, but, um, I just want to, like, I'm always curious to see, like, was there any like unexpected outcomes or optimal outcomes that occurred?

Like peak, like, did you pick 500 time steps?

Because that was,

you know, best or the decay factor of 0.01 because that was most realistic or those types of things.


SPEAKER_00:
Good questions.

And I think we probably could have organized these with some sub headers and some comments a little bit more clearly.

So we're going to look at how

the simulation gets specified and then pull back to like what are the subroutines so the the top part of a python program is basically pulling in and then giving nicknames to other resources that are required so these resources can include packages like numpy which is a common toolkit used for um

math and statistics in Python.

I'm sure Blue can say more on that one.

And then there's this, the config as the CF.

So that's when we call like CF dot number of observations, that's going to call like this, which is defined as this, which is 10.

But of course that can be changed.

So that's where the variables that are set in the config file come into play.

So the header sort of introduces the

the background libraries and resources that need to be imported.

Then a few parameters are defined so that you can have like a base config set.

And then you can also just locally define some variables like the number of initial ants is like, you can define variables that are in the config file, or you can add some new variables in.

And then basically, for the observations in the length of the range of observations, this runs a routine.

And the routine is going to be defined better in ants.py.

But it basically says we're going to run it

For that many steps, for that many starting ants, for that many maximum ants, we're going to save it.

We're going to switch the location of the food.

And then we're going to just print some summary descriptors, like the number of round trips, and then save that in a file.

So that's like sort of the interface wrapper for running a simulation and then outputting some of the descriptive statistics and then also saving that file.

Now, ans.py is 353 lines long.

So it's a little bit longer, but there are some parts that we could, I think, walk through.

The first is that the ant is a class of object.

And it has a few routines.

It has its initiation routine, which is where its X and Y position, for example, are given the starting location.

And then there's updating a forward and a backwards step.

there's the class of the environment so this is kind of like if you do net logo modeling agent based modeling you know you have like the turtle like the agent and then the environment so here we're defining the agent and we're defining the environment and the relationship between the two of them is really whether we have um a stigmergic type multi-agent system or not

So you could have the environment influencing the behavior of agents, like the sunshine is influencing the behavior of the ants, but then the ants don't modify the sunshine.

So that wouldn't be stigmergy.

But if there's a possibility for the agent to modify the environment and for the environment to modify the probability of agent behaviors, there's some sort of bidirectional relationship, then it is stigmergy.

And basically some of the functions that are defined for the environment have to do with which observations are at a given cell, whether the food exists at a given cell, whether the walls exist at a given cell, and then the step forward and the step backward relate to the outgoing and the homecoming trip.

And this is basically just,

doing a delta, which I think is the action map.

It's the delta in position.

And then it checks whether the ant is returning, which is going to be, I believe, on the step backwards side versus the ant going forward.

Decay is a function that's also inside of environment because decay has to do with the decay of the pheromone at that cell.

And then the plotting has to do with just saving the file.

So that's some of this, like the gif and the save fig.

Another object type that's defined, and this is really where there was the main carryover from the previous models, is the Markov decision process.

So here, just like we've talked about in various contexts, like the A, B, C, and D are all

defined and initiated here.

Those are used as you'd expect.

And then the MDP needs to have these functions that relate to setting and resetting certain variables and taking a step.

And then I love this line 210 action inference.

Like this is sort of the kernel that is where it's happening.

Here's the negative expected free energy.

And then there's a calculation

of the negative expected energy of the negative utility calculations divided by the scale factor.

Pretty interesting.

And I don't think we experimented with modifying this scale factor.

And then... So can I just interrupt you?


SPEAKER_02:
What does that scale factor do, really?


SPEAKER_00:
Well, it's mentioned only two times in here.

And...

I'm not exactly sure what it does here.

I think that when you're comparing relative policies, as long as you're dividing them all by the same scale factor, it shouldn't change the relative preference for different policies if they're all being scaled down by the same level.

So I'm not sure why the calculation exists this way.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, it makes sense that they're all, like, whenever you scale it by something.

Maybe it's just to make the numbers more manageable.

Who knows?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

But, well, let's definitely think about that.

And then... Yeah, we could get more explanation from Alec.

But the negative expected free energies...

get saw okay well okay one possible option would be this is like over observations so we know that the observations are discretized between one and ten so if we divide by ten maybe we're going from like a one to ten scale to a zero to one scale which then lets us interpret more cleanly as like probabilities because um

the action ends up being selected based upon the softmax of the negative expected free energies.

So instead of like, you know, 8, 1 and 1, if you do 0.8, 0.1 and 0.1, it's really easy to then say, okay, right, 80% likelihood of choosing this action.

Here's a colony level function related to an ant being initiated and just appearing on the map.

plotting and saving functions.

And then here's the main.

So a lot of times in the Python programs, there's like a lot of sort of upstream functions that are going to get called.

And then main is called.

And then when main is called, that's like where the main program actually happens.

So this instantiates the environment, the ants and the paths.

For the number of ants that are to be specified, that many ants are created with reset MDPs.

All of the image files are set to zero.

The descriptive statistics, like how many completed trips and the ant locations are reset.

And then here is the time step based simulation.

So here for each ant in the ants that exist,

There's going to be some calculations.

This is related to the distance calculation.

Here's adding the ants.

Here's switching the food.

And then here is checking for each ant trajectory, whether it's returning or completed.

And then saving the file.

So...

Again, I think there could be a lot more organization and commenting to sort of understand what these different pieces do.

But yeah, I believe that's some of the main pieces.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.


SPEAKER_02:
Are we going to move to the figures now?


SPEAKER_00:
Um.

Sure, I can actually try to download the videos and I can play the videos.


SPEAKER_02:
Oh yeah, that's great.

So yeah, I thought we were going to go switch back and forth from the code to the.


SPEAKER_00:
OK, so we'll go to the paper.

supplemental data let's see if we can play it in the stream directly will it play oh great it will play okay so here is like the ants you'll you won't see it blue but um uh diffusing around the red ones are going out and the blue ones are coming home so this is just as if you were um watching the colony with video

Um, video two, I think we're gonna add in the pheromone density.

So here, the brighter colors are the pheromone density.

And, like, there, like, one ant made it home, but then it didn't... Here comes another one.

It didn't, um, sort of lock on.

But now we can see there's a light ridge.

It's locked on to the trail, and it's gonna reinforce the trail.

And then...

it seems like the food has switched because now we're seeing some pheromone getting deposited on the left side.

And then there's not as much deposition on the right side.

But this is what really happens in ants.

Like if there's high density of pheromone on that top right, then an answer spending a lot of their time there, especially if they're carrying food, they might actually be reinforcing that part.

So some of the videos are described their similarities and differences in the text.

But I think the interesting one to look at would be

I think six and seven.

So here there's a preference for high pheromone density.

And then I believe it's seven where the ants can lay down pheromone, but they don't have a preference for it.

And so it ends up getting laid down, but then it doesn't get reinforced because they...

they just don't prefer it.

So they act randomly with respect to pheromone.

But these are just like fun simulations.

And yeah, a total obvious next step and important one would be to explore what sets of parameters certain outcomes occur within like, when do they always lock in?

When do they fail to lock in?

But yeah, good supplemental info.


SPEAKER_03:
Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
Um, what else?

Yeah.


SPEAKER_02:
So what, what is the next obvious, um, step for you or where would you like to see this simulation go most?

Like what is the next, if you were to, you know, have unlimited time with Alec to say like, let's code XYZ, um, what, what would you, uh, dream of?


SPEAKER_00:
First, I'd probably go for the annotation and clarification because that's like where coding expertise really comes into play and that helps other people modify and build on the code the most.

Um,

When it were a little more reorganized, I think it would make sense where other sensory and action affordances could be plugged in.

But the piece that- Such as?

Such as?

Like adding another pheromone.

So instead of just having like, you know, pheromone one through 10 density, like make it specific, pheromone scent one.

And then that would allow us to go, okay, now let's just copy and paste pheromone scent two.

And then we could have more flavors.


SPEAKER_02:
So what would you make the pheromone scent 2 do?

Would you make it like pheromone scent 1 drives you to the food and pheromone scent 2 drives you home?

Or would you just make different decay rates?

Or what would you do with the different pheromones?


SPEAKER_00:
One duality would be like plus and minus.

if there was the appropriate behavior around using them.

Another one would be fast and slow decay, which maps on to the way that ants actually use the scents with like some longer chain hydrocarbons that are longer lasting and some shorter chain ones that are volatile.

Another interesting cognitive model would be like there's two or three pheromones and then what the inference is on is the ratio.

And then it could be shown like, you know, no cheating.

The ant is only perceiving the ratio of these two things.

So that would be kind of, it's kind of like bimetallism.

Like you tie to the idea of a ratio rather than to just the absolute amount of one.

So like it could be food could be a little sweet and a little salty or a lot sweet and a lot salty.

And then the inference of whether it's tasty is like whether it's balanced.

So then if we're thinking about the ant tasting balances in the world, maybe that could help it have an internal manifold that by definition would be simpler than the state space of the pheromone densities out there in the generative process.


SPEAKER_02:
so i i heard that there are two types of ants like that there are grease eating ants and sweet eating ants are they just like different like what is that what makes that distinction actually and like does the same ant really eat both things or what's up with that um just reminded me of you know like uh uh


SPEAKER_00:
evil neutral good like the classifications for characters and then what are the major macro molecules what are the nutritious molecules other than vitamins well there's like protein carbohydrates and fats lipids and

different parts of the colony life cycle might use these different nutrients differently but then what are the resources that could be obtained like sweet that could come from like an extra floral nectary so like a plant that's secreting a honeydew or scale insects and the carbohydrate-rich fluids that they secrete and ants that love sugar and pies and stuff then there's oil and then there's also like protein like there's meat ants

And the turtle ants in the canopy forests in some rainforests, I've heard from many ant researchers that the most effective traps use human urine.

And those ants, well, it's high nitrogen, high protein, relatively speaking, if you're a tiny guy.

So...

It's interesting why some species would prefer more of the other.

If you're putting on more biomass, like if you're making larger colonies, you probably need a lot more protein and lipids.

Whereas if you have longer lived workers, then you don't need as much lipid and protein, but you might use a lot of carbohydrates.

So that's sort of the fun way to think about the workers, like a car, like you need the metal to make the car, but then you only need gas.

So like you need the protein and lipids to make the ants, but then afterwards you really use more carbohydrates, even though they probably also digest other nutrients.

But I think the piece to connect would be like, find some,

student or person who loves meta analysis it could be us or it could be someone else and establish like which data sets are already there what's a recent impactful ants publication that already has done a lot of the meta and analytic work of at least compiling data sets and there are several ants databases that have compiled behavioral data morphological data ecological data genomic data and then um

how could that data format play into this model?

What are we going to put in?

And then I think a good step would just be to show like, what does the active inference ANT model explain, predict, suggest that other first principles approaches like reinforcement learning might not perceive?


SPEAKER_02:
Very nice.

So my question about the different types of food that ants eat was really linked to different pheromone

like types or ratios or concentrations like if i have a high preference for lipids but i'll eat sugar like you know maybe my ratio preference is different like this is another way to like enable different like types of ants or just to give them different preferences over the food that they eat and then where like if we initiate with the same kind of agent and the same kind of food do they all

like proportionately distribute or do some carbohydrate-preferring ants go to lipids and some lipid-preferring ants go to carbohydrates?

I just wonder, and like, does it have to do with proximity or the number of ants that were there before?

Or I think that all of that is interesting and kind of relates to

like this multi goal aspect of active inference.

That's always really kind of difficult to, I mean, it's, it's easy when we think about and get food, right?

Like, so the active inference model is, is easy.

It's manageable is what it is.

So it becomes computationally tractable and like mathematically tractable when it's a single type of agent with a single goal, or even like two different types of agents with two different types of goals that are overlapping.

I mean, so you can see just how exponentially,

expands when you have this kind of multi-goal thing and like some goals are like more pressing than others right like my immediate needs have to be met for me to like you know desire to go to college like I have to have food water shelter clothing etc and so these kinds of multi-goal and like prioritizing goal setups are um really interesting and a great way I think to start to

approach modeling real or us or complex systems that have multiple conflicting, sometimes conflicting goals.


SPEAKER_00:
Another setting to transpose and explore that where there's a ton of data would be first make active beference with the honeybees.

So there they don't use stigmergy on the trail because they're on the wing, they're flying.

But in the nest, you could have like in the hive, as it were, you could have a special dance floor.

And so that is where maybe like a active inference communication model could come into play.

so that this would be less on the stigma g side but more on like the multi-agent distributed communication side so flip out the trail um modification with a symbolic waggle dance whether it actually does a waggle dance or whether we just say okay there was a waggle dance that occurred and it had this precision and these estimates

Then honeybees are well studied for making the trade-offs between foraging for nectar, carbohydrate, pollen, which has like lipid and protein, and water.

And a lot of work on like, is it that 100% of the variance in that foraging outcome being different is about the needs of the colony and all workers respond to the needs of the colony?

Is it that the workers have their own nestmate level preferences and then the colony outcome just is what it is?

Or is it somewhere in between where there's preferences that differ between workers, maybe as a function of their genetic backgrounds, but then the colony outcomes are also in feedback with them?

So that could be a case.

And I think this kind of takes us back to slide eight, which is like when we have the systems lined up,

and we understand their similarities and differences, then, um, we'll be able to transpose across different systems in a really interesting way.

And then ask, um, it's kind of like biomimicry on behavioral systems.

Is this more like a honeybee situation where people are exchanging information and then going their own way?

Or is this more like a trail stigma G situation?

And, um,

So like there's gonna be some early work transposing into these major different domains.

Like again, this was the first paper that transposed active inference and included StigmaG, although that had been discussed by Axel Constant and others regarding ecology.

It had always been qualitatively a part of the discussion that niche modification was relevant and that agents were able to be in feedback with their surroundings.

And then it went from the natural language

through the formalism to the code.

And then now it can feed back, change how we think and write and speak.

And then we'll transpose into a few of these major domains, start to subspecify into situations and it'll be very cool.


SPEAKER_02:
So it's super interesting about like the communication versus like the trail, like which of these, like, and I just wonder what you think, like as humans,

which are we more like?

Are we more like bees or are we more like ants?

Like do we communicate and then go on our separate way or do we just like follow in a row?

Like where do you think we're at in the bee ant trajectory?


SPEAKER_00:
makes me think of a drive that we went on this weekend and um there was the street signs and then there was a big field and then there was the pleasure path that was cutting the hypotenuse across the field so it was like a big block with an empty field in it and so people were walking and so they were making that trail and so there was this juxtaposition between the um

societally imposed and scaffold infrastructure, like the streets and the symbolic signs, you know, the stop sign here, and this is where this street and that street intersect.

And then there's the people who were moving on that landscape.

And then even if you don't see any other people at that moment, it's their stigmergy with the trail.

And so it is an interesting question.

And it's almost like we have symbolic rules and scaffolds like law and norms and culture that are, even though there's ways to think about those as stigmergy themselves for the agent level, that's more like a symbolic communication.

And then it's like the ant stigmergy is like blurring the lines of

that the symbolism provides for us.

So I think there's, um, there's some components of both plus other insects, maybe not insects too, but that's quite contentious.


SPEAKER_02:
So that, that brings me back to like the concept of, of intergenerational stigmergy, but, but really like maybe my question was not like phrased correctly.

Like, sure.

We leave some stigmatic traces as humans for like,

the next generations, but also like we leave like stigmergy for strangers, right?

Like, so I wonder if like, and I know that the ant colonies, like the pheromones are different and the different species of ant, they're different.

And so I wonder, maybe is it like the fact that total strangers can go, you know, searching for collective intelligence or collective behavior or something like that on the internet and come to the same result or certain like total strangers see the stop sign

and know that there's some sort of behavioral norm that's supposed to be enacted just by seeing the signs in the street.

And so we leave this, like, you know, we do this externalization of cognition a lot as humans.

And so this is what I want to see in the animal kingdom.

Like, I want to see traces of like, can strange animals say like, oh, I see a rock stack.

I know the trail goes this way, right?

Like, does that happen in the animal kingdom or is that what's maybe uniquely human?


SPEAKER_00:
Good question.

And I think this is why we can study these systems and gain insight without naively copying their strategies or thinking that we must be them or they must be us.

Because

are, whatever it is that we're doing, it's at the intersection of like stigmergy and cumulative culture modification and symbolism.

So in a way, the ant and the bee foraging paradigms, hashtag not all ants because some don't do pheromone trails, et cetera, but one extreme is like the syntax of the foraging trail

and there's no symbolic communication.

It's just stigmergy.

And then the other extreme is no stigmergic modification.

There's no trace left in the environment at all.

There's just transient symbolic communication.

So it's this continuum from the transient symbolic

Like I'm going to pass you a message and then you're going to be off on your way to the stigmergic and often sub symbolic, like the path crossing that field.

It isn't directly a symbol saying walk on me, but it's,

it is an affordance.

We perceive it as an ecological affordance, but it doesn't have it.

That's not what it symbolizes.

That's what it is.

And that's how we enact it.

So like we could have some types of active inference models that highlight that transient among agents, meaning based communication versus models that don't need to take on any grandiose hermeneutic

communication and what does communication mean?

And how does thinking through other minds happen?

We just look to the ground and about how agents respond to their niche, which is a combination of biotic and abiotic.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.


SPEAKER_02:
So yeah, just any final thoughts or, or any, anything else for me, I've given all my, all my thoughts out, I think.


SPEAKER_00:
Oh, me too, over the years.

But thanks for pushing for this paper for 29.

And 30 is going to be hot on the heels slash abdomen of this paper because I think we're going to be able to operationalize a lot of the discussions that we had about extended cognition.

I know it's also going to bring back

we talked about with the definitions of a self and individuality so um another one in the books on to our third decade of um papers on the live stream and uh yeah i hope people found it interesting as with other papers except this is one where hopefully they can get in touch with the authors and understand that it's a totally open area and a collaborative one too


SPEAKER_02:
Awesome.

Well, thanks for giving us your time and always giving us your time.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

You too, Blue.

So I'll flip to the closing slide.

That's what we can still think about.

And awesome.

See everyone around next time.