## HSu9sDa6-BQ

SPEAKER_00:
all right i think we are live hello everyone and welcome to the active inference live stream this is active inference live stream 11 it is december 16 2020 and there's a lot to get to today so thanks for tuning in

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

We are an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us at our website, ActiveInference.org, on Twitter as Inference Active, at our Gmail account, our YouTube channel, or our public Keybase team and username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us feedback so we can improve our work, whether during the live stream or after.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streaming goes, mute if there's noise in your background, we'll always remember to use respectful speech behavior, et cetera.

So thanks everyone.

Just a few announcements and points of process.

There are two more meetings for 2020, and they will both be from 7.30 to 9 a.m.

PST.

And both of these meetings are going to be about the paper's sophisticated affective inference.

Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events, a 2020 paper from the IY Conference.

And that's what this 11.0 is going to be primarily about.

So if you're listening to this at the end of 2020, then we would love to have you at either 11.1 on December 22nd or 11.2 on December 29th.

And also we are very happy to now announce for 2021,

That's right.

That is going to be the year 2021.

We have announced our whole year's schedule.

So it's going to be Tuesdays from 7 to 9 a.m.

PST.

And all the instructions, everything you need to know is at this link, rb.gy slash kvnpyc.

And just to show you what that link looks like, it is a spreadsheet.

and on the top is information about how to participate in the discussion so fill out this form if you want to participate email us with what dates you want to attend and then we will add you to the discussions event that day and then if you want to collaborate check out this link which i'll get to in a second and just looking at a few of these papers that we have up until the middle of april

For every single paper, we've been really lucky enough and have an awesome community of authors who want to join on.

So we'll have an author representative of every single paper up through the middle of April and beyond, and most weeks we'll have an author on.

So we're going to get a lot of opportunities to hear from the authors about what they were trying to do with their papers.

I'm just really excited to hear from all these different perspectives.

And then, of course, by bringing on people who are learning active inference or who are from any different field of expertise or experience, we're going to be able to try out some new combinations that maybe haven't been tried.

Speaking of the Active Inference Lab beyond the live stream, if you go to activeinference.org, you'll see a call for collaboration for 2021.

And this aweber.t.ausm3 link

you'll be able to fill out a form of interest and just let us know if you might be interested in collaborating for 2021, because we have three main projects that we're really excited to be working on.

The first has to do with an active inference book of knowledge, which is gonna be like a participatory and an open and a very interesting designed textbook.

reference and source of online course material.

That'll be project one.

That's very educational driven.

Project two is going to be the live stream and some other associated content types that we'll get to in 2021.

And then project three is going to be tools for remote teams.

So this is going to be related to

the frameworks for analysis that we laid out in our September 9th paper, Vyatkin et al.

And we're going to be working on how we can do analysis and design for remote teams.

So that will be quite exciting.

All right, thanks for all of that.

Sorry about the relatively long introduction.

Here we are in ACT-IMP Stream 11.0.

And the goal of ACT-IMP Stream 11 is to set the context for the next two weeks of discussion, which are 11.1 and 11.2.

The paper that we're gonna be reading in both of these weeks is, Sophisticated Affective Inference, Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events.

And that's by Kasper Hesp et al, 2020, and the ResearchGate link is provided.

This video, Dot Zero, is an introduction or a context for some of these ideas.

It's not a review or a final word or a judgment.

The video is just an attempt to contextualize some of the ideas and the vocabulary, as well as some of the formalisms for the paper, which will be really helpful in understanding the paper for people of all backgrounds.

The punchline of the paper is that we can add features to active inference, such as anticipation and affect, and aiming for more powerful simulated agents and perhaps new insights for computational psychiatry.

So we're going to be looking at it with two main foci.

One is on the simulating agents side, either computational agents or robots.

The other side is sort of the human side with the computational psychiatry and how are we going to be using this to have insight into the human brain and mental health.

The sections of 11.0.

First, we will go through the keywords and that will be like a bridge or an on-ramp for those who are from those different fields, maybe learning about active inference for the first time.

Then we'll talk about the aims and claims, abstract and the roadmap of the paper, how they get from A to Z.

Then we'll go through the formalisms and figures.

And in this paper's case, the formalisms are actually drawn from a few other papers.

So this video might go a little long, and it will contain information on the two citations that give us sophisticated affective inference, which is the sophisticated side and the affective side.

But we'll get to there in a few slides.

In 11 and point one and point two, we will discuss this paper.

So if you're listening in the live chat, it'd be awesome if you have any comments as well as in the comments after the video is done, or if you want to put it in a Twitter thread or however, just let us know what questions we could ask the authors and also the panelists on 11.1 and 11.2 about this paper.

And if those discussions have already happened, then keep on adding comments because the discussion never stops.

All right, so the keywords, the best part.

The keywords, as usual, there's so much to say about each of these keywords.

And my target here is really the construction of the on-ramp for this paper and the on-ramp for Active Inference.

If you're in the Active Inference community, I hope that these keywords are an invitation to explore some adjacent areas of research.

And if you're just learning about Active Inference and you want to familiarize yourself more, then hopefully these keywords are like an interface or a foundation for your understanding.

And if you have any thoughts or any questions, then always just leave a comment or get in touch with us or come on an active inference stream because we're all really just learning these ideas at this point.

And so we just want to hear what people think about what are the connections that are possible.

And certainly my hasty production of these videos would be greatly improved by people in the live chat or comments just letting us know where we could take the discussion.

so the keywords of the paper included anticipation counterfactuals affect and anxiety so maybe some of these words are more common than others people talk about anticipating events a lot in everyday life as well as of course anxiety and affect or emotionality counterfactuals you don't hear as much about in everyday life but maybe one does they just don't use that word so we'll come back to that in a second

All right, the first term is anticipation.

So anticipation is a really cool term and there's a lot of interesting research.

And my goal here is to really draw out this thread of anticipation itself apart from, for example, systems approaches to ecology or cybernetic approaches to action.

So we're gonna really focus on this anticipation link and that's gonna hopefully

enrich in all of these different areas because we're going to see how they make this puzzle that fits together and it's bigger than all the puzzle pieces so we're going to start on the anticipation side with a couple of key citations which are related to robert rosen who was in the middle of the 1900s did some very influential anticipation research and then um also this 2017 paper by louis and some other recent review papers on rosen's work helped contextualize this discussion for me on anticipation so

The axiom of anticipation, as they say, is that life is anticipatory.

So we've heard of life as a replicator.

We've heard of life as a negantropic force locally, like an organizing force.

And here we're going to have another facet, and that's that life is anticipatory.

So we're really thinking about all kinds of systems, just like we were thinking about definitions of life as being pattern making or replicating.

Anticipating is now going to be one of our key features for what is life like.

at least according to this lineage of research.

And this is going to relate to a ton of other ideas, including the counterfactual, which is really important.

And the work of Rosen and others on anticipatory systems led to them formalizing what an anticipatory system was.

And here was the actual diagram that they used.

and um again there's many perspectives on anticipation the cybernetics of russia and uh non-russian non-western anticipatory research but i'm just going to trace out this lineage of rosen for right now and certainly the concept isn't new but the systematic study of it was new when rosen was writing his book and so here's a quote from the um

mathematical foundations that leads me to this figure.

It says Rosen's rigorously mathematical study of this biology-inspired subject led to a sequence of papers culminating in his book, Anticipatory Systems, Philosophical, Mathematical, and Methodological Foundations.

So here's the definition that is provided of an anticipatory system.

An anticipatory system is a natural system that contains an internal predictive model of itself and of its environment, which allows it to change state at an instant in accord with the model's predictions pertaining to a later instant.

An anticipatory system's present behavior depends upon future states or future inputs generated by an internal predictive model.

Model-based behavior, or more specifically, anticipatory model-based behavior, is the essence of social, economic, and political activity."

And that was drawn out as this MES.

So it looks kind of familiar to some diagrams we've looked at in Actifstream, but it's actually different letters representing different things.

So M is the model of the system.

We might say that's like the generative model.

E is the effector.

Those are like the action states.

And then S is going to be the system or the niche.

And the environment includes the total system.

And then the effectors influence the system.

And then there's a bidirectional relationship with the model and the effectors.

Now, I hope this isn't too far down the rabbit hole, but I think there's a few things that active inference and non-active inference people can learn from this here, because again, it helps to distinguish which parts of what we're talking about are related to, for example, inactivism, or which parts are related to Bayesian computation statistics, which parts are related to thermodynamics.

And by tracing out the different lineages of thought that culminate in what we have today, we can also clarify not just previous ideas and realign them in the context of active inference, but also we can start to potentially work on all the systems that were within the scope of these disparate ideas within the scope of what we have.

And so it is very important to make the mapping and to be specific about it, rather than just say, well, yeah, active inference reimagines it, so it's going to be totally different.

Well, it's not going to be totally different, actually, because a lot of these figures are from the 1970s, and they're going to remind a lot of active inference people about probably a lot of things, things that I'm not even perceiving, which is why I put it out there for other active inference people and non to be thinking about.

So...

um we saw from an activism and from the ecological psychological domains that we're developing in the 1900s that there's many rich ways to think about this shared interaction or the interface between the ecological niche and the skilled and intentional organism we also saw from multi-scale systems complex systems that there's many ways to think about internalism and externalism and about causal relationships there's no privileged level of causation or other multi-scale system approaches

Okay, now we're going to focus on anticipation, not these other multi-scale domains.

We're going to be one domain, one type of niche.

What are we going to really be looking at with anticipation?

Okay.

So the anticipation research frames this world as a multi-loop situation.

There are simple or complex versions that include the observer's formal model F as well as the natural system.

So down here on the bottom, we have F, which is the formal system of the agent.

That's like internal to the agent.

And then we have N, the actual external natural system.

And so we've seen this in, again, the context of internalism and externalism and in action and inference, but here it's actually only about anticipation.

That's why I think it's so interesting, especially because it's actually called inference, what the agent is doing with the formal model.

And that's inference under a formal model.

So a lot of hopefully connections are being made.

and the idea of the anticipation research is that we can find analogies amongst natural systems within rosen's holistic anticipatory ecology so one formal system this is going to be our formal ecology and we're going to go out to a bunch of natural systems deserts and rainforests and we're going to be doing a decoding process and by decoding the causal entailments of the natural system by inferring what kind of feedback loops are anticipating and being anticipated by that system

which is our own loopiness over here, by undergoing that process, we'll be able to find structural relationships between different natural systems.

So here's natural system one and natural system two.

And this line of research is interesting because it introduces a basis in logical areas, as well as in category theory and dynamical systems.

So it bridges a lot of areas of formalisms, and that enables this kind of law-like and semantic or ontological addressment of systems, which are things that the active inference research frontier is also focused on, like, is active inference a theory of semantics?

And so...

I think there's a couple ways in which active inference could come to this anticipatory framework and have some insights that are a value-add from active inference.

So first, the formal model of the organism doesn't have to be formal in any sense that we traditionally understand.

but it is something that is formalizable or maybe it's related to the church turing hypothesis or there's a lot of ways to think about this but active inference is pretty vague on purpose about the exact nature of this model by just saying well it's something that we're also inferring as an observer who can make a certain kind of model so we're not sure that we're on the right one but this f is a generative model so it doesn't have to be just an analytical or inferential model it's actually related to control systems so here it's encoding and decoding

But we talked a lot about action and about perception.

So active inference more squarely places this loop, not in the realm of signal and abstraction and meaning like semiosis, but within the control theory loop of system state and internal states and effectors.

Second, the formal model, as we've talked about with the internalism and externalism and tale of two densities, the internal model or the formal model doesn't have to be simply inside of the organism.

It can exist in this exocortex way, in this extended or embedded and cultured or a collective way.

And so it doesn't need to be all within the bounds of the organism.

Now, Rosen probably was aware of all these tensions and used fuzzy sets and ecological thinking, a lot of other things.

So it's not, again, not really commenting on the anticipation, sorry, anticipation and research.

Don't know too much about it, but I'm just thinking about where we could draw and build upon.

And really, this is so interesting that in the anticipation area, there's a dialectic or there's a dynamic between the formal system and the natural system.

So it's almost like natural and artificial.

And then that's related to encoding and decoding.

So it's framed about information and about natural communications with an unnatural almost.

whereas the active inference approach takes that ecological insight and connects it to control theory cybernetics so it's action oriented that's the action research side as well instead of the semiotic elements and seeing the semi-semiosis as emerging out of action rather than seeing the semiosis as primary and stimulating or signaling action which one is primary well which one was around first

And again, really important precursor research for complex systems, a lot of other areas, and just we're coming at it from anticipation.

We're not using too much active inference jargon.

We're just thinking, wow, if active inference could map to anticipation, then every keyword in literature about anticipation, we could be able to be one jump away.

So that's why semantic indexing of research databases is so important as well.

all right second keyword counterfactuals so counterfactuals are very related to prediction and to anticipation and that is why um they're in this order so many philosophers and this is drawing from the stanford encyclopedia philosophy many philosophers have proposed uh to analyze causal concepts in terms of counterfactuals and the basic idea is that a causes c

and that's related to this claim that if a had not occurred c would not have occurred so that's called the difference making cause or the cause that makes a difference so it's like you imagine two worlds where something happens or it doesn't happen and then you ask about how they'd be different so if tomorrow there was no sunrise in california then it wouldn't be the temperature it is today so you can think about an alternate world even one that can't happen or wouldn't happen and then you can talk about that and say oh well that's because the sun causes

the day to get warmer when it rises or when the earth rises, should I say.

And what's good about this counterfactual is that you can go beyond simple counterfactuals and you can actually have quite nuanced logic of counterfactuals.

So here was an example from Lewis 73.

where depending on the way that more information is added uh it changes the truth value of the counterfactual so here's just an example of how that can flip and then also how we can use logic not going too deep but just we can use logic to denote these sentences so if i had shirked my duty like not um signed up when i had to no harm would have ensued no harm would have followed so

If there would have been I, this event I, then not H, no harm.

And then in B, we see if I had shirked my duty and you had two, so now it's kind of like the and operator, I and you, two events happen, event I and event you, then there would have been H.

And then here in part C, we see I and U and part T, then not H. And so this is kind of like a formalization, but it can also be done in ways that are a little bit more data driven instead of formal framework driven.

But it's very related to so many things that we've talked about, like infinite grammars and logical sequences and about the ways that you can have a generative model.

And then you can ask about how things are based upon how things could be in a different sense.

We're going to, of course, come back to that with the papers.

Here is where the counterfactuals come a little bit more directly to inference.

So counterfactuals in the inference case are like, can we understand how things are or were by asking how things could be?

That's purely about inference.

And then the action orientation of that question is, can we reduce uncertainty about future states?

Like, can I make sure that I have a good core body temperature?

by asking about how things could be so that I can choose the right actions.

So if it gets cold later tonight and I'm going to want to have to have a jacket or feel warm, then I might need to get a jacket right now.

And so that's what this paper is about.

That's what we're going to return to in precision.

But let's keep it within the sort of keyword level analysis.

And here's a plot from SEP, from Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

And it's a strict analysis, so categorical, of how the antecedent, what happens before, not the ant, the antecedent, is related to what does or does not.

That's what this kind of L means, not.

the consequence the consequences are what happened after so in this situation we have things that actually happened before above the above yeah the x-axis and then things that didn't happen before like you know if the sun wouldn't have risen yesterday then that's this not phi that's not what happened

And then the consequences are shown on this symmetry axis.

So in this quadrant on the top left, we have things that did happen before and they did follow.

So this is like today I tied my shoe and it did stay on.

So this is sort of normal reality.

The shaded region must be empty.

Why?

Because it's things that actually did happen in the antecedent, but didn't happen in the consequent.

So this is like things that were, you know,

I boiled the water, but then it wasn't hot or something like that.

Like something where you did the setup correctly, but then it didn't occur.

So we know that that doesn't really happen.

And then there's this whole set of worlds below the X-axis, which is like, if anything had been different in the past, if I had been wearing a different color shirt, if...

all of those worlds whether what actually happens happened or not all of the worlds of the past are accessible because they might relate to a similar world outcome or not and we can nuance this sort of categorical approach to what's called a similarity analysis

And so a similarity analysis is where we can start with our estimate of our current state, the current moment, the causal relationships and all that sort of stuff at this origin point.

And then with the same axes of what did or didn't actually lead up to the event, and then what did or actually didn't follow from the event,

we can have more of a continuum.

So yes, there's still little shaded area here, but as you get to events that are further and further in the future, you get to things that potentially there's more latitude.

But the sphere is a similarity idea.

It's kind of like philosophers discovering numbers.

They're going from the categories

they're like maybe it's a 1 through 10 scale maybe it's a continuum maybe we could take an integral over it maybe we could take a derivative what would all these things mean and so that's kind of the fruitful discussion with people who have a quantitative and a qualitative background because the rigor of this approach which is barely scraped out with this just summary abstract that i have

it's a lot of horsepower to plug into if we can reconsider some of these topics in terms of a more integrative way of thinking then we can come back to everything about antecedent and consequent and reinterpret it um and re-enliven it so that's what's really exciting about transdisciplinary research and teams hopefully not to always be returning to that point though but it's really true

All right, affect.

So there's many usages of the word affect.

Just looking at the dictionary definition, there was just so many.

And I found this image and I thought, I don't even know what to say about this image because person A has an angry emotional affect.

So that's like using their character about them.

They had an affected character

And then trying to hide their anger, person A put on an affect because affect has a connotation of being how other people perceive your manner of speech.

And affect also has a sense that means affected, like changed, altered in a way.

Once he entered the room, he started speaking in an affected manner.

Now, it doesn't really describe anything.

It just says he did it in a different manner, but still.

Person A then affects, affected, that's what this is trying to show in this left cartoon, I believe, affected person B by pushing them into the pool.

The effect of this A versus E was that person B ended up in the pool, right side.

So that's what I think was trying to be shown was the common sense and the confusion, which is the affect is the cause and the effect is the consequence.

So that's why it's interesting because affect and effect, of course, common typo, but it relates to what we just saw about the precedent

the antecedent and the consequent in terms of counterfactual structures of the world.

But also affect has to do with, of course, emotionality.

That's why we're here.

That's what interests us.

And so in that more classical psychological sense,

affect is considered to be related to like emotion or experience or qualia again not my area just from my skimming in preparation for this video and often affect is displayed on these lower dimension manifolds or axes of variation so for example one axis might be from relaxed to stimulated now that doesn't mean feeling good or bad you can be feeling good and relaxed or bad or tired or um here there's a mild to intense so these are

emotions that don't grab your salience so much.

And these are ones at the high intensity that do, like being astonished or being awed or shocked.

Then there is a orthogonal, so a independent angle axis on the X here that goes from unpleasant to pleasant.

And so whether you think of it as a two by two, like there's the pleasant and intense experiences in the top right and mild and unpleasant down here being a little bit too cold or something like that.

You can think of it in a two by two.

You can think of it in a circle.

You could think of it as having more dimensions.

You can think of it as having measurements in this phase space.

So if this is maybe the first time you've seen all the emotions on a chart,

think about what all the options of charts are, and then all the options of emotions, and then that's kind of what we're gonna be getting at.

So not just points in space, but we could actually be talking about trajectories through that phase space, whether it's an emotional cascade or a pathway to radicalization, like we were talking about yesterday in 10.2,

whatever it happens to be, or just your daily routine.

If you wake up and you're here, how are we going to get to here?

This is from feeling afraid through feeling excited and happy into content and serene.

Now, not that this is a pathway or the pathway or whatever, but perhaps,

If we use tools like active inference or other computational frameworks, could it be possible to introduce some ways of thinking about this diagram that would help us actually navigate these ridges and find paths, find policies for people who are in one area of this phase space to find a trajectory into different parts of that phase space?

So they already have the phase model of the valence and the effect.

And then there's already this trajectory model of fields and trajectories coming together.

And now we're going to reconsider.

And here's just a couple citations on the left about non-active inference neuroscience approaches to valence and to affect.

Valence being positive to negative, just like an electron or a proton has like a valence.

Valence is positive to negative axis.

So that's the X axis here.

It's considered to be one of the major axes of variation as people who feel good or bad or change how they feel throughout time can attest to.

And so, again, we want to think about affect in a couple senses, not just the semantic.

We want to think about affect as a statistical phenomena, especially one that can be studied in all kinds of animals as well as in even computational agents.

And in that situation, affect as a statistical phenomena is like

feeling greedy or feeling volatile or feeling regretful or feeling confident.

These are terms that we might want to apply to even a chess playing statistical machine or a gambling machine.

Oh, it's really acting shy.

The intentional stance from Dennett, maybe that's a valid thing to say, but the statistical sense of affect is just purely the way that the system's behaving.

How would we describe its intentionality as if?

That's very behaviorist, very from the outside.

Then there's the neuro side of affect, and that's related to the neuroscience kind of literature that's here.

People who are actually looking in the brain for electro and chemical differences and people who have different affect and different affect states.

connecting it to different features, dynamical or otherwise of the brain.

So that approach is very internalist.

It's focused on things internal to the organism, and it tends towards this sort of neuroscientific reductionism.

And then there's also affect in the psychological and in the psychiatric sense, which is the experience.

And that's where, of course, this whole area, this field of emotions that maybe some people experience a little differently than others, but no one strongly disagrees or says that it's preferable to go on this side or the other.

I mean, that's kind of the question in many ways of cognitive diversity, though.

And this is where I believe active inference comes into play is you have the statistical behaviorist, could be about robots, could be about anything.

You have the neuroscientific, very internalist, very neuro human related.

And then you have the psychological psychiatric, which is very social and very semantic and based upon the clinical relationship in many cases.

Here's where active inference comes into play.

It adds in a level of computational computability, but also

philosophical agnosticism about a system that using systems engineering, other approaches, we're going to be able to talk about systems very precisely while also remaining basically agnostic on several key issues.

So when people think that some aspect of uncertainty in a framework is a simply negative thing, it's not that I'm doing apologetics here.

I don't think every uncertainty is a good thing.

Certainly not.

but there are several areas, just like we discussed at the end of 10.2, we're actually saying, yeah, we're using it as a tool.

So whether the person chooses to have cultural script A or cultural script B about this experience,

We're not going to make a value judgment on that, but potentially from a purely statistical framework, we just want to be able to describe certain kinds of behavioral state transition matrices being different in our model.

So that's a way where people can have a cultural experience and a personal experience, but also use tools that are empowering.

So also beyond the computational and the systems tractability, we bring in this whole control and action perspective because all of these are about thoughts, you know, words, words, words, thoughts, thoughts, thoughts, and rumination and overthinking and underthinking can also be

a maladaptive state for individuals or for collectives.

So how are we going to orient this psychiatry, especially in action, instead of just like, you're in brain state A, so now we need to zap you or give you a chemical to put you into brain state B.

Well, it's not so simple, or at least we haven't figured out the simple way to do it yet.

So how are we going to think big about the niche and the culture and the extended environment, and then ask about how could we navigate this, you know,

care support team experiencer network how can we navigate through this landscape which is defined by specifics for this person in their situation how are we going to find a productive policy to get from here to here so those are the kinds of things that get me really excited because i feel like they're strong yet neutral and um powerful ways to talk about mental states

And to give one example of a mental state, which was a keyword, so I have to go into it for this section, but it's something that's in our experience is anxiety.

So I'm not a medical doctor, of course, and I'm not your medical doctor.

So this is really about that computational psychiatry perspective.

though um we all feel anxious we all want to help each other no one is alone or should feel alone so we all want to work together and help get you on a productive path wherever you're at all right so here's the definition of anxiety that's given by none other than anxiety.org

Anxiety is the mind and body's reaction to stressful, dangerous, or unfamiliar situations.

It is the sense of uneasiness, distress, or dread you feel before a significant event.

A certain level of anxiety helps us stay alert and aware, but for those suffering from an anxiety disorder, it feels far from normal.

It can be completely debilitating.

And in the anxiety.org literature, they provide three different categories of anxiety disorders.

Again, this is contextualizing why we're studying this area, as well as trying to find what are the footholds where active inference could start to make an impact

whether in people's lives or in the biomedical system or in the health insurance system, just where across the board are we going to see this insight take place in systems change?

So the three kinds of categories of anxiety that they talk about

are uh one anxiety disorders which are general featured by excessive fear and anxiety kind of i don't it's a little self-explanatory but uh second category is obsessive compulsive and related disorders which are related to obsessive intrusive thoughts and compulsive behaviors these behaviors are performed to alleviate anxiety associated with obsessive thoughts

in their quote and then the third category is trauma and stressor related so one time or chronic stresses and all these different interacting factors that are so nuanced that is related to this third category so what to say about anxiety i mean wow so first is there's just many kinds and there's many experiences so we want to respect that everyone's

having their own experience and it's going to be a totally unique experience to them and it will demand a personalized way to help them just like everyone so that was sort of the first point then there's of course to say that there's many aspects to this and there's many causes and factors just from the clustering of diagnoses that can be considered within the category of anxiety disorders

according to the DSM, let's say, it's quite broad.

There's many features that some people might present with versus others, and there's no clarity on the underlying neurophysiological or even situational basis.

And also it influences many kinds of thoughts and behaviors.

But what's a theme in anxiety and something that connects all these different areas is uncertainty is a theme.

And when we see the word uncertainty in active inference, it's like a doorway because active inference is all about agents that are trying to reduce their own uncertainty about action in their niche.

so when we see uncertainty and anxieties about uncertainty we want to think about how we could build active inference into a broader discussion about psychology and psychiatry so let's think about these different manifestations of anxiety and reframe them in the context of active inference and a couple of other topics that's partially where this paper is coming and we can start um with the uh integration of all the keywords together before we go into the paper so

starting with anxiety let's go first to affect so anxiety it's either a dimension of affect or it's a point in affect but the point is it's someone's lived experience that they're having anxiety and specifically that they're feeling negative about it and they want to get better because if it's not feeling negative about it then it's not pathological that would be considered i believe within the you know

realm of healthy but not suffering but if the person says puts their hands up and says yes i'm suffering i would like to have less anxiety that's what we're talking about in this situation um as well as managing it for everyone whether they realize that at a metacognitive level or not

next keyword is uh anticipation and anxiety can be very related to anticipation which is like predictions or estimates for the future and here's one thing that we can unpack at this point as we start to turn towards more mathematical sections for the rest of the talk and it's actually that the estimate is really like a package of a couple of things it's the specific contents of the expectation but also it's its likelihood

relative to other things that could happen, and it's confidence.

So that's like a way to say that we can separate what the prediction is from how likely it is, and from how likely we think our prediction is going to be good.

And let's combine that with a few examples with the counterfactuals, okay?

Because I said it's how likely something is relative to other outcomes, and that's related to the counterfactuals.

That's related to those spheres of similarities and those similar worlds.

And so counterfactuals are essential for anticipation, but they're also critical in the current moment.

So let's think about anxiety as a theme and counterfactuals and anticipation and about the past, present, future.

So a counterfactual about the past

that might lead to anxiety would be like, I wish that in the past I had done X instead of Z, or I wish I never did Z, you know, two hours ago or 20 hours ago or 20 years ago.

And then a counterfactual about the current moment is like, I wish it were like X right now instead of like Z right now.

Just, I wish something were different in a state about the world.

But here's where we get those confidence estimators and the anticipatory systems element, because we don't have to anticipate the past or the

present that's just kind of how time's arrow is funny huh but when we're talking about the future um people don't really include these confidence estimators um about the present they don't say i'm 100 confident that it's daytime um they say something like it just is daytime but when they include something about the future it's very common to include a confidence estimator like i think it's unlikely that my friend will do x in the next three years

And then you can have always predictions amidst other predictions.

So like, I think there's a 10% chance that my baseball team wins the World Series.

That means that there's a 90% chance that you don't think they're going to win the World Series.

And then you could have a critique or a metacognitive estimate for your estimate.

yeah i said 10 and 90 but actually i have no idea so it could be way way way off so you have a very loose estimate even on the 10 and 90 other times you're like yes i'm very very confident now again you could be wrong you could be way off you could be asking the wrong questions you could be you know not saving the text file so the world intervenes in ways that go beyond this model but we're thinking about just this simple decision-making context

And so in the context of anxiety, we can think about the generative model that leads to the production of affect of experience, whether it's epiphenomenal or not, later day.

But this generative model is in this strange attractor of a zone of thought and action.

And that strange attractor is whether it's ruminating or whether it's related to any of these other manifestations of anxiety, it's like there's a strange attractor of thought

and then that can be overwhelming or it can lead to negative experiences or it can lead through a trajectory that goes to negative places so we want to be maybe moving towards thinking about this landscape of attractors of thought and action and niche and social environment thinking about all these factors together and then this field of affordances the field of consciousness the free energy landscape how can we bring all these things together think about how to help people who are experiencing anxiety and other situations

And before we go to the paper, it's this slide we'll return to, and it's what does free energy principle and active inference say about the relationship between agents in the world when, in this case, the agent is affective, emotional, and imaginative?

And here's the affective agent who's also imagining future emotions.

So this is the kind of model that we want to keep in mind for the paper.

It's about an agent who's acting in the world

And right now it's just a simple interface, but you could imagine more nuanced interfaces at a later model.

And this agent is having an experience, but that's not a philosophical claim.

It's just a parameter that it's calculating.

And then it is also calculating perceived future likelihoods of different states.

Okay, so with no technical details at all, that's what this paper is about.

Agents in the world with this valence affect.

Here, it's simple.

It's zero to one, like good to bad, but you could go in different dimensions.

But here, it's just good to bad, agent in the world thinking about the future.

Okay, now it's going to get more technical.

That's what the paper's for, though.

So, Sophisticated Affective Inference, Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events.

It's from October 2020, so just like two months ago, at the First International Workshop on Active Inference, IY2020 at Ghent.

And the authors are listed here, so cool.

First annual, good, bold start.

We wish them the best of luck in their series.

The aims and the claims of the paper are as follows.

So they write, in this paper, we aim to provide a mechanistic account of how affective responses can be generated by imagined future outcomes and how this can become dysfunctional during rumination.

By combining two recent developments in active inference, anticipation and affect, we provide a formal model of these phenomena and simulate how overthinking a situation can occur, continuing to the point where unlikely yet aversive and arousing situations emerge in one's imagination.

So, interesting motivation for the paper, no?

And in non-active inference terms, I would frame this as, how can we model affective and anticipatory active inference agents?

What features do these simulated agents display in simple environments?

And then, because this is such a short and introductory paper,

How could we think about this being useful in the fields of psychiatry, cybernetics, all these different areas?

And of course, we'll go into the formalisms soon.

So the abstract of the paper.

In this paper, we combine sophisticated and deep parametric active inference to create an agent whose affective states change as a consequence of its Bayesian beliefs about how possible future outcomes will affect future beliefs.

To achieve this, we augment Markov decision processes with a Bayes adaptive deep temporal tree search that is guided by a free energy functional, which recursively scores counterfactual futures.

So we're already seeing a lot of the keywords come back into play.

Our model reproduces the common phenomena of rumination over a situation until unlikely yet aversive and arousing situations emerge in one's imagination.

As a proof of concept, we show how certain hyperparameters give rise to neurocognitive dynamics that characterize imagination-induced anxiety.

And so we're going to use the computational psychiatry definition of anxiety.

And yep, it's a short abstract, relatively short paper, invokes a lot of formalisms.

And so I hope that people find it interesting.

The roadmap is pretty short.

We only have to go to a few gas stations on this one.

There's an introduction.

There's a methods.

Figure one is a directed acyclic Bayesian graph, which we'll build up to.

Figure two is an illustration of the state space of the task with all four states.

And then table three has a lot of formalism, and it's the predictive posteriors that provide the empirical priors for the generative model.

Three is the results.

And then there's figure three, which is just an example of simulation results showing detrimental effects of overthinking.

So they made it about overthinking, but they didn't overthink the complexity of the paper.

So it's a simple,

straightforward paper, but again, it invokes a lot.

So let's get to the formalisms and let's try to really understand them or at least give them a space where they can exist.

Even if we don't know all the details, where are the edges of the formalism so that we could be

thinking about it correctly or asking the right questions or just the questions that make sense for us whatever they are that's the best question to ask best question to ask in a live chat best question to ask in a comment or on a live stream but definitely just ask it because someone else is going to be asking it and you'll be really helping them so formalisms here's from the paper they wrote

By combining the ensuing recursive update scheme of sophisticated inference with deep parametric affective inference, I don't have the British accent to say it the right way though, we can derive a general purpose generative model of the following mathematical form summarized graphically in figure one and in tabular form in table one.

Okay, so they're combining two citations here, and so it's worthwhile to ask what these citations were.

And they are sophisticated inference.

That's Fristin et al.

2020, the first citation in the sentence.

And then there is Hesp et al.

's paper, Deeply Felt Affect, which was actually published November 30th, 2020.

So it was a preprint, I think, at the time of this one being written, but then now it's been published.

So...

here's how to think about this paper sophisticated affective inference that's what everyone is listening to this video about that's what this paper is about that's what the discussion is mostly about so it's combining you know building on the shoulders of other shoulders the affect side with the temporal depth side both of which we're going to go into in this video which is why it's a background video

This paper builds on top of them another brick in the wall, another citation in the network.

And we're going to be thinking about where does that go?

Given that this was in October 2020 and it's only December 2020, or maybe even only a few months later if you're listening to this, but where are the next places to go?

Well, there are the directions of making more advanced simulations, like taking something that they took as a fixed variable in this paper and just asking if it could be a vector of variables, or if it could be a continuum, or if it could be another type of model inside of that, and then give it a new acronym and make it another meme.

So what simulation directions could we go?

Just purely exploring or making it more mappable to other fields.

Then

How could we move in a way to integrate better with computational psychiatry and psychology?

So how could we integrate with experts and with vocabulary and key questions in those fields so that this isn't just like a machine learning parallel universe related to mental health, but it's actually something that's connected to how social workers in the field or how caretakers in their daily experience relate to these topics.

And then another direction, which I don't know too much about, but I hope that we can have some people on to teach us more, are about new models for robotics.

So how does including these kind of top level parameters like affect and in the context of a deeply nuanced counterfactual anticipatory model, how does that relate to a robotics context?

And will that help robotic birds finally come out for public use?

Well, let's go to sophisticated inference first.

So again, temporal depth and affect are the two pillars that we're gonna build on.

We're gonna go depth first search.

Some of you are gonna get that.

Here is the sophisticated inference paper, which we're not gonna read for an Actim stream.

So I will just read the abstract.

Active inference offers the first principle account of sentient behavior from which special and important cases can be derived.

For example, reinforcement learning, active learning, Bayes optimal inference, Bayes optimal design, et cetera.

Active inference resolves the exploration-exploitation dilemma in relation to prior preferences by placing information gain on the same footing as reward or value.

In brief, active inference replaces value functions with functionals of Bayesian beliefs in the form of an expected variational free energy.

Key point.

in this paper we consider a sophisticated kind of active inference using a recursive form of expected free energy sophistication describes the degree to which an agent has beliefs about beliefs so higher order theories

We consider agents with beliefs about the counterfactual consequences of action for states of affairs and beliefs about those latent states.

In other words, we move from simply considering beliefs about what would happen if I did that, so that's a first degree counterfactual, to what would I believe about what would happen if I did that?

That's a second degree counterfactual.

So for example, it could be, I really want to know about a pen's relationship to my affordance of writing, but I don't know how heavy it is.

so you can keep on thinking about well what should i do with my hand to find out how heavy it is so i can resolve my uncertainty about it being an affordance these are the kinds of nested and open-ended frameworks for cause which can be extremely contextual and ecologically conditioned we want to set up these causal chains in a ways that that we can capture them that's what this is about but the state space is big so a common theme we're going to come back to is like how do we look through these big state spaces

recursive form of the free energy functional effectively implements a deep tree search over actions and outcomes in the future crucially this search is over sequences of belief states as opposed to states per se we illustrate the competence of this scheme using numerical simulations of deep decision problems so um one way of interpreting this last part about here is this search is over sequences of belief states opposed to states per se

This is really taking that full jump into the world of action instead of just inference on world states.

So instead of like, I'm going to have all my computational power on what the temperature is going to be in California in one year from today, it could be like I should just have between one and three jackets and then within an 80 20, but really more like 99 one.

all have the right policy.

But no one puts the big computational power on the jacket prediction algorithm.

They go on the climate prediction algorithm.

And there's a lot to say about that, why that decision is made, not in that specific case, but just in general.

Why do we go with all of our power on predicting states in the world rather than doing prediction on policy?

When in the end, policy is like what we can control and bound

And then we can leave space for the unknown.

We can leave space for how likely is this tsunami every once in 30 years or 50 or 100?

What's the most resilient thing we can do right now?

What's the best inference on policy for our beachside community, not what is the Gaussian distribution of tsunami waiting times?

Do people hopefully see a few directions in which active inference steps into these issues about uncertainty?

Here's some of the formalisms from the paper.

They write, our objective is to optimize beliefs, so an approximate posterior over policies, pi as always,

and their consequences, which are hidden states, S, and those are basically S triple line, it's like a super equal sign, and it's saying S is related to this tau, the T is like the tau, the policy horizon.

So the hidden states are S from some initial state, S1, state at time one, until the policy horizon tau.

So that's the length of the prediction, the depth through time.

Given the observations O from up until time, until the current time T, this optimization can be cast as minimizing a generalized free energy functional F of, so it's a function of something, and that function can be enormously complex, like a neural net is like a function.

It's a mapping of inputs to outputs.

It's a map.

Functions are maps.

And so f of everything, it's like, that's the biggest possible wormhole.

But that's why this is a powerful approach.

And then it's q of s and pi.

So this functional is around...

q which is some distribution of states and policy so the world state is like what the actual my estimate about the world's state is going to be and the pi is my policy so here's what is being asked here for those who might be learning about active inference or wanting to really go into these formalisms for perhaps even the first time

This is like asking, how can we have the best policy over a given time horizon?

So that's the big control theory question.

Given tau and given the distribution of affordances, pi, what's the best pi over tau?

Not division, just what is the best pi over the time horizon tau?

So if my policies are left or right in a, you know...

collision situation, and then there's a time horizon, you only have those two choices.

And so you can pull back to the meta game and say, do I have another choice?

There's always space for innovation and for breaking out of the box and for reframing it.

But at this first base level, let's just focus on a certain time horizon and a certain set of policies that are fixed.

So we're playing like Connect Four here, or we're playing like Backgammon.

It's going to work for these models too.

And we want to ask, how can we estimate the consequences of pi?

So of ourself, of the policies of others, and the policies of groups.

And the way that we're going to do that mapping, rather than go infinitely deep on what is a causal model of the world or have every atom simulated in the world, we're actually going to go

to a different way and we're going to ask how are observed states related to our estimates of hidden states and how does that relate to our underlying causal model of how hidden states change through time and how our policy influences them.

That's the framing.

And there's times where you can like, you know, breathe as much as you want, but you're not gonna change by yourself the CO2 in the atmosphere.

So by modeling it this way, it doesn't mean that there's gonna be a way to make the estimate.

The agent might not be set up in a way to succeed.

But again, it's the framing here that matters.

And you could frame a winning chess game or a losing chess game or a million pawns versus one or any board size.

All this can be included.

That's what we're using these numbers and letters for.

because then the pie can be really nuanced it could be um a million different self-driving car parameter settings but it could be evaluated they continue

This generalized free energy has two parts.

The first entails a generative model for state transitions given policies, while the second entails a generative model for policies that depends on the final states, so emitting constants.

So the generalized free energy of sophisticated inference, which is deep time inference, is gonna have two parts.

One part is going to be a generative model.

They're both generative models, but they're kind of like two-stroke engine.

One generative model is about state transitions given policies.

And then the other half of the generative model is about policies given state estimates of the world.

And so those are manifested in Q and P.

and they're both related to policy, but they're related in really specific ways.

So more details are provided above.

This is just the screenshot from the paper, but we have two key equations that come at the bottom here.

Q, so mind your Q's and P's, just classic.

Q is conditioned given policy.

It's about observations and states given policy.

and it's related to a model of how observations arise from states O conditioned on S, and related to another model about how states are conditioned on policies.

Okay, so it kind of makes sense because we're conditioning here on states.

I'm sorry, we're conditioning on this right side Q with policy.

And then here on the P, we're conditioning on S, but then we're doing an S estimation here.

So we like, maybe it kind of cancels.

That's how we ultimately get S on the left side here.

Like this one somehow scoots to the left side.

Ask a statistician, but there's more nuanced layouts.

This is just the simple one.

And it's basically related to this P and Q internally.

Maybe there's another, I don't see how Q, I don't think it's recursively defined.

I think it's two components of Q, but let's hear the clarification from the authors.

Then there's this P function, and that is related to policy selection itself.

So it's not conditioned on policy.

P is about policy.

and this is related to expectations across policies and the free energy generalized free energy of the policy so p is like the policy selection side and q is like the inference side because this is like what are the states and the observations of the world given policy that i do given that i go on a run every day what would be the states and the observables of the world that would be different

So it's a counterfactual, but I'm framing it within this type of approach.

And then the other half is given that that's a likely or a possible or a preferable or a curious or a fun or a, you know, habit forming, whatever it happened to be, however it fits into E and G defined formally.

that relates to the policy selection path that ends up getting enacted by p so yep definitely let's get some more clarification from the formalists themselves

They continue with this section, equation 1.3.

And so here's something pretty interesting.

They write, this corresponds to a form of approximate Bayesian inference, i.e.

variational base, in which equation 1.3 is iterated over factors of the mean field approximation to perform a coordinate descent or fixed point iteration.

So they are saying that this formalization corresponds to approximate Bayesian inference.

I'm going to provide a little bit more information on that in a second.

I found that to be kind of an interesting claim and not sure, are there mathematicians or machine learning experts who could clarify this issue?

That would be appreciated.

And here's what they wrote, which I thought was really interesting.

Sophisticated inference recovers Bayes adaptive reinforcement learning in the zero temperature limit.

so cool because it's like saying in the extreme no noise case in some info thermodynamic way it converges to a certain type of other thing so just like some algorithms might converge to a uh

normal distribution, let's just say.

You sample a bunch of weights and they converge to normal.

This is like a convergence, but this model family is converging on Bayes adaptive reinforcement learning.

So we take all that we know about Bayes adaptive reinforcement learning, all those neural nets, and then now we have the best one.

And then it's about converging into that best funnel

in a higher temperature space that's even going beyond the model parameters of those Bayesian approaches.

Quoting the authors again, both approaches, sophisticated inference and the Bayes adaptive reinforcement learning,

Perform belief state planning, where the agent maximizes an objective function by taking into account how it expects its own beliefs to change in the future and evinces a degree of sophistication.

AKA being good at chess, being sophisticated.

Go.

The key distinction is that Bayes adaptive reinforcement learning considers arbitrary reward functions, while sophisticated active inference optimizes an expected free energy that can be motivated from first principles.

Key difference.

People who are looking for a key difference between free energy and something else, that was one.

While both the Bayesian approach and free energy can be specified for particular tasks, the expected free energy additionally mandates the agent to seek out information about the world beyond what is necessary for solving a particular task.

So that's extremely key.

This goes beyond, for example, framing the potential value of play in terms of the estimated values of the deliverables.

This actually something that we've heard so many participants on the Actim stream like Blue and others highlight is like making space for play.

And this full formalization of the expected free energy, it includes the information gain.

as well as the value-driven components and some other components.

So actually on equal footing, down to even the units of information used, at least according to this Fristian interview I listened to a couple days ago, it's on one of the playlists on our channel, the same natural unit, or at least the same framework.

Whether there's a coefficient that balances them, he seemed pretty negative on that, but...

that i think there could be another way that they're integrated in a more um nuanced uh way than just simply an 80 20 20 80 this isn't bipartite partitioning this isn't nature nurture 1.0 this is relational causal networks and so it's going to have a really different way of phrasing it it's not going to be just a coefficient but it will be like a coefficient i believe because there's systems where it is like it's 80 20 or it's 20 80.

in terms of delivering on something standard versus novelty.

So like we talked about scripts in 10, you know, there's the scripts like the ritual that are meant to be carried out exactly.

Then there's the ones that are unstructured.

So that whole space.

Back to the authors.

This model allows inference to account for the artificial curiosity that goes beyond reward seeking to the gathering of evidence for the agent's existence.

i.e.

its marginal likelihood.

This is sometimes referred to as self-evidencing, and the citation there is the Howey 2016.

And so we can think back to Active Inference 8 when we were thinking about that mountain car and about how it just wanted to explore.

But by exploring in that admittedly trivial setup, it did discover the goal in the way that the optimal reward uphill climber got ground down.

so how can we move beyond just one well settings move into more nuanced maybe even semantic innovation landscapes and optimization landscapes and converge to approximate bayesian inference in the truly formal case where we need to but then relax those assumptions with instrumentalism and use approximate approximate bayesian inference

empirically empirically just as statisticians as scientists as policy planners that's really the question in the doorway all right another from the same sophisticated paper amortized inference effectively and also see active inference stream eight with um alec who gave us some really great information about this and hopefully we'll have alec on a future discussion as well so amortized inference is learning to infer

Variational autoencoders can be regarded as an instance of amortized inference if we ignore conditioning on policy.

Clearly, amortization precludes online inference,

that's like real time, like data in a loop, and as such may appear biologically implausible.

However, it might be the case that certain brain structures learn to infer, e.g.

the cerebellum might learn from inferential processes implemented by the cerebral cortex.

So this is definitely related to a neurophysiological argument for like grounding the plausibility of certain computations being performed or as if they were being performed by certain brain regions that have certain macro histological arrangement or micro histological structure.

Sounds great.

I would say in the case of insects, could we study whether they're doing it or not?

Or I just think maybe it's simpler or it will help us realize that, oh wait, we don't really need the neurons to be doing that.

We just need to be able to think about it.

Just like we didn't need the neuron to be doing a linear regression for us to do a linear regression across neurons.

So I don't think that using these frameworks necessarily casts the system being analyzed into the same statistical framework any more than the linear regression frame does.

So that's to say they all do implicitly, and that's the transparent concept.

That's the water we swim in.

Given that it's the water we swim in and there's a few different fish tanks, I just don't see how using free energy on a system makes you strongly committed to that system doing a certain thing.

Another part that was interesting from this paper was this focus on separating the intrinsic and the extrinsic value.

And so there's a lot of ways that this can be broken down, but basically a few cool equations.

So this is the divergence, the Kolbach-Leiber KL informational divergence, which is a measure of how distant two distributions are informationally.

And the KL divergence between this Q and the P

is seen as the risk and that is equal to the um like the risk of certain states like whether the red light is going to signal something or not and then um the equal sign on the other side there's risk in terms of the outcomes so here's s condition on pi here's o condition on pi and then here it's p of s instead of p of o so this is a divergence from the observations

given the outcome.

So this is like, this Q is about observations, P is about observations and it's conditioned on policy.

So this is divergence in states, divergence in outcomes, plus expectations,

this is about q of observations being conditioned on policy so we're kind of functionalizing and conditioning on conditioning on a lot but this is actually about the states and this is about the states given the observations and the policy and how that is bringing us close to what

the mapping between states and observations which is the interesting part and so there's so much to say here but they unpack it in terms of the intrinsic and the extrinsic value so there's basically this um

Separate sections, I would just say, not just in the interest of time, but just in the interest of knowing that these formalisms really demand to be unpacked and mapped in a really formal way, not just discussed in an introductory lecture.

So let's save them for another time.

as far as the general and the specific cases of this there's a nice figure here with a few different special cases that descend into certain uh different sub areas so if there's no prior this is like an uninformed or an optimally uninformed bayesian design so that's the information maximization principle that's info gain

If we have no ambiguity, like if the prediction can be completely perfect as far as the observations are concerned, like all the thermometers are perfect in your building, for example, then you can have basically risk sensitive or aware policies, that's like cybernetics, as well as informational control and kind of Occam's principle.

I'd be really curious to learn what they meant here, but maybe that means like argument by simplicity in the context of systems engineering.

Could be pretty interesting.

Then if there's no intrinsic value, so if it's just pure curiosity search, pure exploration search, then it can converge depending on how you value intrinsic versus extrinsic to a variety of different

types of theory and then also there's this maximum entropy which i would also like to learn more about from the authors about no ambiguity or priors so i'm kind of curious how these two no priors and no ambiguity how does that relate to the no ambiguity or priors and then is there one that doesn't have any with no intrinsic value either like what happens when you have nothing all right and this one is going to come back in a very very similar format in um the

figures for the paper, but basically it starts off and it's like, here's us at the top at observation time point three.

And then there's one, two, three, four things can happen.

And then from thing one or three happening, four things could be observed.

And then from one or three of those or from two or four, then you can have one, two, three, four things happen.

And here outcome one and two and four

lead to one of four observations.

And so this is like an unrolling.

This is like a rollout of a deep time prediction on a tree, and that's related to a couple different ideas, which is why we introduced them, which is the prediction through recursion

and the counterfactual branching.

So the first thing to remember is that the branches are literally counterfactuals.

It's like, what would my prediction be?

But it's really just predicting the whole distribution.

So instead of thinking it as predicting, is my team going to win or not?

Just think, what is the distribution of likelihoods of each team winning the World Series?

And then that's like, what is the likelihood of each of these outcomes conditioned on this?

And you keep on conditioning on, conditioning on, and rolling that out through deep time.

So it relates to counterfactuals and the state outcome mapping.

So state of the world and then mapped onto your observations, the sensory outcomes, through this learning of the relationship.

So here is what it looks like in the format that we looked at at the end of 10.2.

You have B, the transition matrix.

And it's like there's a state, it emits observation, it's this dark kind.

Then there's a...

an action policy, whether from the agent and or from the world, and that modifies or not the state transition matrix, and then the state goes to the next state.

And then through A, which can be similar or not, it emits another observation that could be probabilistic or not.

So we're going to see this again in just a few slides, but pretty interesting.

And that's just the first approach.

And that shows that the sophisticated inference paper was the one that really brought it out.

And then also, this is pretty interesting.

Figure eight, and here's the caption.

This schematic summarizes the various imperatives implied by minimizing a free energy functional of posterior beliefs about policies, ensuring states, and subsequent outcomes.

The information diagrams in the upper panels represent the entropy of three variables, where intersections correspond to shared information or mutual information.

So, Professor Jim Crutchfield at UC Davis, or anyone in your...

um area i would love to be learning more about this question of the overlapping venn diagrams because i remember a lecture with some overlapping venn diagrams and information theory from professor crutchfield that was very influential for me

And then the caption continues.

A conditional entropy corresponds to an area that precludes the variable upon which the entropy is conditioned.

Note that there is no overlap between policies and outcomes that is outside hidden states.

This is because hidden states form a Markov blanket, i.e.

an informational bottleneck between policies and outcomes.

Two complementary formulations of minimizing expected free energy are shown on the right in terms of risk and ambiguity.

and left in terms of information gain and entropy, respectively.

One can see that both will tend to increase the overlap of mutual information between hidden states and outputs.

That's what we really want, is we want the states and the outputs, we want to be learning that relationship.

Both will tend to increase the overlap of mutual information between hidden states and outputs while minimizing entropy or Bayesian risk.

In these diagrams, we have assumed steady state such that risk becomes the mutual information between policies and hidden states.

For simplicity, we have omitted dependencies on initial observations.

Fair.

The various schemes or formulations considered in the text are shown in the bottom.

These demonstrate that the Bayesian control theory, i.e.

KL control and Bayesian risk, and optimal Bayesian design figure as complementary imperatives.

Okay, Bayesian design of what?

The answer is of experiments.

So this is optimal experimentation conditioned on everything you know, okay?

So this is like given the state of what's known, how can you get information gained?

And then here is related to making the lowest possible risk through policy given to the states that are known.

And that's related to what's known as KL control.

And so what we're seeing here is in this mapping of active inference and not necessarily other frameworks

I'd be open to correction or expansion on this, but not necessarily in other frameworks are there such even ways to understand and equivocate a really broad range of strategies.

For example, you could do really, this is kind of like explore, and this is kind of like exploit.

except instead of the parameter switching explore to exploit or one mode to the other it's actually like a more nuanced trade-off mediated through policy and what that policy is enacting in is a co-optimization

of information gain, that's this outward and it's expansive in this variational principle with the downward coordinating Bayesian risk precision optimization.

So the Bayesian design is like, you're on this point on this, you know, wherever you're at and it's expanding outwards with the info gain, with the optimal experimentation, and then it's collapsing inwards in order to decrease surprise about the world.

All right.

now on um april 6th and 13th 2021 casper hesp and other authors from this recently published paper will be joining the active stream so we'll go through the paper and all the figures and everything then but um the

figures we'll just go through one first time because they're going to be basically exactly copied over for the sophisticated affective inference so where we start is m1 and we'll go through these pretty fast

M1, the first layer of the model, is about how hidden states instantaneously are associated with observations.

So here's observations, here's a likelihood mapping, here's the states we're estimating, states given our prior, D, and then from observations through the likelihood mapping, A. It's a math.

Now, M2 is a generative model of anticipation.

So here we have D, our initial priors, and then we have B, which is how D changes, basically how those priors change.

And then we have states through time, one, two, three.

And then at each time, we're having either a prediction or a confirmation or an updating of an observation.

That's the time-specific predictive density.

So M2 is like, how does M1, which is at one time point, change over two or more time points?

So that's M2.

M3 is a generative model of action.

So this is where we introduce the action layer.

And so there's a couple of pieces that play into it.

The first thing to notice is that we have this exact same M2.

It's literally, it's the exact same image copied out.

Here's M2.

Looks kind of like three letters.

There are three prongs pointing down and a little head with a D. Same exact shape here.

Okay, so M2, the box is clarifying.

This is the exact same M2 that we just talked about.

M3 is around that.

And so how does M3 come into play?

Well, it's all about pi, policy.

And so P, policy, plays into the B matrix, which is how the state estimate changes through time.

So our policy is really, if I exercise every day, then I'll be getting healthier in this way.

So something like that.

And the pi is again, only playing into these B matrices.

It's not playing into the S state estimation.

It's not playing into any A matrix learning.

It's a different part of the brain, different part of the model, or so they say, maybe.

And the pi reaches downwards into the B,

but also it's getting influenced by a couple of new things up here, which is the baseline prior over policies and the phenotypic outcome preferences, which are C. So C is your preference matrix.

E is like your affordances.

That's like your baseline affordances of your prior of affordances.

Just like...

endowed from evolution and from learning and development, what are the tools that are at the disposal?

And then there's the phenotypic preferences, which are also evolutionary priors that can be updated and they can be contextual.

And through G,

there's a policy selection okay more math more math but it's about d this internal model of how states and observations are linked and then we're going to hook p pi policy in here through using this g free energy optimizing function then g

is the interface for where this generative model of implicit metacognition comes into play and so this estimation of meta confidence so remember we talked about well it's 10 that my team's going to win the world series but i'm not too confident about that estimate

And so implicitly about the past, present, and future, we speak about it in different ways, but we have not just a state estimate about the world, but a precision estimate.

Like it was around 70 degrees or it was exactly 70 degrees.

I looked at it on a thermometer.

And so here gamma is this precision parameter.

And beta is the prior over precision.

So it's because beta is the parameter, I think, of this gamma distribution.

so the gamma parameter is what is kind of the high to low temperature on g so it is like the explore exploit trade-off in a sense but it relates in a little bit more nuanced and and surely with a lot of different consequences um it relates to this um uh optimal experimentation versus precision management convergence divergence uh

expansive retraction and tensile and compressive, tensegrity, synergetics, it relates to a lot of these other areas.

All right, so to conclude that section, yeah, this one is a little long, but it's fun and it was a fun one to learn about.

So hopefully we can return to this slide now and say, okay, the affect and the temporal depth are...

two pillars and now we're going to build on top of them.

We're going to think about an agent that goes deep and one of its predictions is about its own affect.

So here's the figure from the paper that we're reading from the HESP et al.

And the reason why I went through it in the previous section was because as you'll see, it's very similar

to the previous version so we have states and the a likelihood mapping states and observations of the world then we have b the matrix of how states change in the world and then we have u which is action here and u is as before interfacing only with b okay so that's where we've seen before but now we're going to be estimating precision

and free energy at each future time point.

So we're going to be considering our action and our, importantly, our precision parameter, which is required to calculate the G from the top,

we're going to have basically this initial condition d, and then there's going to be a state that carries over into the next situation.

So the next branch down the row, this whole thing is going to get copied over.

So you can have these big graphs, all these recursive functions calling each other, basically.

But

This is the state.

And then A here is going to be initially just giving this first state.

But again, we're going to be at each time point rolling out in a deep, sophisticated way, task-specific, sophisticated inference as in Frist in 2020.

We're going to be doing this counterfactual analysis about this deep branching and our precision and our valence about it at each time.

Now, here's the illustration of the state space of the task with the four states.

So it starts off neutral.

And then basically there's a transition that's possible.

So you can imagine a four by four matrix with the state transition probabilities.

And the transition matrix that they set up has a ability to go from a neutral to a precise small gain.

That's two.

It's a good probability of getting a good outcome.

Or you can go to this dangerous high gain where it's mapped here.

I believe it has the three.

So if you land on a one, you stay in the neutral position.

If you get to a two, you can go to either one or three.

or they have it connected to two, but I don't know if they mean that edge properly.

Then if you get to three, you can hop to one, two, three, or four.

Again, I don't know if they have an edge there as well.

And then if you get to four, it's an extremely painful state and it's absorbing.

It only leads to itself.

And so here it's like a dead end.

So at the first time point, let's just say we're starting at T equals one, and we're just evaluating, I'm in state one, what could happen?

Okay, so here you could go to four.

Now you can't on that first one.

So maybe the likelihood of outcome four is zero.

So you're like, wow, all my outcomes are great.

I could either have this two or this three, not that those are the values, but you could at least say at least one down the road, gain of one, gain of two, one step down the road, both my outcomes are good.

Then you look one level deeper.

And all of a sudden there's a few things happening.

First is this branch is staying very high positive.

All the estimates are very positive.

But on this branch, you're starting to see that it's possible to get this negative valence.

So now your estimates out of these four, you're like, well, it could be pretty good, pretty good, very good, or kind of negative.

So now at each time point, not only are you tracking the likelihood of different estimates, but really you're tracking it as like a distribution.

And the distribution is about state estimates and uncertainty and the variance, the prior, beta, gamma.

Those are the key pieces here.

That's why this is so interesting.

And so as you can see from this graphical layout, this kind of Markov state transition matrix layout, which we could see maybe in the code,

you can see that eventually you're gonna get to four.

Even if only 1% of the time from three to four, you go to four, if you stay in four, you're always gonna stay in four.

It's an absorbing state.

And so eventually if you had a hundred little ants or a hundred particles and they started here, they'd all end up in four if you set up that way and they can't escape.

And so here's what we end up seeing.

Well, first, before we get where we see, these are just the mathematics.

We're not gonna go into it in this one, but they're described there and they're described here and here.

And here's what you get when you do the simulation.

And so remember that the negative states were absorbing and there was just an increasing number of them.

And so four charts, all on this time scale from zero to 2000.

So the first thing to notice is that the perception of the good versus bad, it starts in the middle.

Then it goes high, maybe as it's discovering some of these shallow branches where there's a lot of winds.

But then around 500, it starts to really slip down, and that's in terms of how many states it's playing out the simulation in.

And now, so even though the simulation each round is totally winnable, let's just say if there is any agency in the situation, by imagining that there's an infinite or a growing number of future outcomes that are negative, it leads one to have bad affect in the way that they modeled it in this model.

Another interesting feature is that initially as evidence starts pouring in, precision increases.

But then, around the same time that the valence drops, the precision drops basically as well.

This looks like a crypto just dying.

But the precision dropping here, going from a high of around 1.8 to flooring out at 0.6...

that is uh showing that there's an increased variance of the estimate it's like would you rather know that you're gonna have ten dollars plus or minus one or ten dollars plus or minus forty it's like wait I might have negative thirty dollars from this deal that sounds like very different maybe I'll just take ten plus or minus two and so that's related to risk tolerance and design of experiments

Okay, let's look at this bottom right, and then we'll go to the top right.

The bottom right is the threat perception, which is the fraction of imagined events that are negative.

So again, at one temporal depth, there's 0% of these outcomes are negative because we haven't gotten there yet.

In this first step, none of them can be negative.

You can't get any of the bad outcome.

But as more and more simulations roll out, there starts to be this converging amount that are negative.

Now here, again, they just call their proof of concept, but they're just showing one parameter combination.

So it's not a statement about how a certain natural system is in just any way.

It's a framework for thinking about it.

But as the threat perception increases and levels off, there's also a stabilization

of an uncertain predictive posterior for action so when things are good precision is high and the posterior on action is obvious so it's like very clear we're getting a lot of big winning states and there's a very low posterior for a lot of negative states then as the percentage of threats starts to increase

and interestingly it's actually after it starts to get a little better but maybe the state space is just branching out even further as that happens there's a phase transition in the precision and the valence which in active inference are very tied up because anxiety which is a negative emotion we're saying in this one in excess is increased by uncertainty

And so basically this is like a good level of uncertainty.

Our posterior on action was pretty, we were pretty clear about which way we were gonna be able to go.

But then this is like, even though the green is still at 60%, the teal is kind of at like, you know, so the good ones are not,

losing most of it is actually rewarding but there's still a small fraction that are damaging but it turns out that by having that level of uncertainty it generates negative affect negative valence through this low precision of the model

so that's pretty interesting and this reduced action model precision is interesting too so that's basically the figures of the paper it was relatively long but again the paper was short so i hope that you read it but at the same time it clearly builds so directly upon the other two work that it just didn't make sense to only read the formalisms from this paper when it was so linked to previous work

all right so the concluding questions are just what are frameworks for affect and anticipation what would a good framework for affect or anticipation enable for us what does affect encompass other than valence like other than the plus minus what other features of affect are there

what are some unique predictions and some experiments of this model whether in general or in the specific situation but like what is something that this model predicts that we might be able to go out and test or measure or already have the data to know and then what are the next steps for active inference how will active inference

increase to another level of sophistication or include another group of researchers in the conversation or integrate best or emerging practices from another domain.

How can active inference grow from this encounter and serve as a helpful reference point for the other fields as well?

And then what is the goal of this research?

They were mapping things onto anxiety, but of course it's just a parameter and a model.

And certainly few authors would say that their models are anything but parameters and models.

Yet it's so difficult to, especially the multiple senses of anticipatory systems and living systems and affect in different systems, robotic systems.

It's at the nexus where,

It's almost like granting agency to models, but then removing agencies from humans.

So, you know, having affect in a model, but then not caring about a human affect when they're telling you.

So that's sort of a not not, of course, saying that the authors are doing that or part of that or anything like that.

It's just that when we have these affective emotive agents, it's like, yeah, that's us.

That's how we should be respecting people.

So how can we

build on that and take this model which seems to be really affirmative about human agency and choice at the very least enabling of human agency in a way that other models again not that they weren't but that is different that's kind of the discussion that we are having and that's what's been so awesome so thanks for participating everyone it was kind of a fun discussion a little bit more than an hour and a half

will provide follow-up forms to the live participants so anyone's feedback suggestions questions would be super helpful and awesome stay in communication with us and uh yeah we hope to see you in these last two discussions of 2020 and then the new 7 a.m to 9 a.m pst 2021 i'm really looking forward to that i know a lot of our teammates are as well so check it out go to the website

get the updated information.

Thanks everyone for listening in live or replay.

And it was a fun discussion.

I hope that you got something out of it.

All right.

Thanks.

And talk to you later.

## xCqavxpiw44

SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome everyone to the active inference live stream it is active inference live stream 11.1 on 1 2 2 2 2 0 2 0 december 22nd 2020 this is going to be a really fun discussion and hopefully we'll see if anyone else joins us but other than that we got a nice small group and i'm really looking forward to talking to you all about this paper

Welcome to the Active Inference Lab, everyone.

The Active Inference Lab is an experiment in online team communication, learning, and practice related to Active Inference.

You can find us at our website, activeinference.org, on Twitter, at email, our YouTube channel, or our public Keybase team and username.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hand so that we can hear from everybody who wants to speak, and we'll use respectful speech, behavior, et cetera.

So just a couple points of process.

Today, on December 22nd, we are in 11.1.

And next week will be the last act imp stream for 2020 on December 29th, 2020.

And that will be at 7.30 to 9 a.m.

PST on the same paper that we're talking about today.

And everyone is welcome to join.

Then we are very happy to announce the active inference stream schedule for 2021, which can be found at this rb.gy link.

Going to this link, you'll be able to find out which papers we'll be discussing which week and how to participate if you are so interested.

And also all these sessions come and join for however much you can.

So if you have to join late or leave early, it's all good.

We just want to have participation and your perspective.

This is what the calendar looks like.

So looking ahead to some of the first papers we're going to discuss.

The first weeks of January, we're going to be discussing in 13, a paper by Adam Saffron and Colin DeYoung.

In the second weeks of January, we're going to be talking about Mel Andrews' paper, The Math is Not the Territory.

So everybody should be finding exciting papers and letting us know when we can read them for ActimStream.

Also, just one last note, if you go to ActiveInference.org, you'll see a call for a collaboration for the Active Inference Lab 2021.

So check that out if you'd like to get involved in any way.

OK, thanks for all that.

Here we are in Active Inference Stream 11.1.

And today, first, we are going to have introductions and warm up questions.

And then we're going to turn to the sections of 11.1.

The paper we're discussing is Sophisticated Affective Inference, Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events by Kasper Hesp et al.

in 2020 from the IY Proceedings.

We're going to talk about the aims and claims, the abstract and the roadmap, and then we'll go through the figures and maybe even some of the citations that are referenced in the paper.

Next week, we're going to be discussing the same paper.

So save and submit your questions and get in touch if you'd like to participate.

Okay, here we are in the intros and warmups.

So let's introduce ourselves.

We can each give a short introduction or check-in and then pass to somebody who hasn't spoken.

So I'm Daniel, I'm in California and I'll pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm also in California and I will pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Hi, I'm Blue.

I'm based out of New Mexico.

I'm an independent research consultant looking at bioinformatics a lot and a lot of agent-based modeling mostly.

And I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Steven.

I'm based in Canada, in Toronto.

And I'm interested in the ways Active Inference can help inform the ways groups and communities understand their place in the world.

And I will pass it over to Ivan.


SPEAKER_00:
Let's go to Alex, actually.


SPEAKER_04:
Oh, sorry.

Yeah, hello.

My name is Alex.

I am in Moscow, Russia.

I'm a researcher in systems management school, and I'm trying to find interconnections and possible ways to connect active inference with systems engineering and system thinking frameworks.

Awesome.


SPEAKER_00:
And have we a new fellow jitzer?

It could be Ryan.

So any time that Ryan or anyone joins, we'll just hop in and go from there.

Okay, I just want to check these messages.

All right.

Thanks.

Okay, let's go to the warm-up questions.

So for the warm-up questions, we can each just raise our hand, give some thoughts, and we'll have plenty of time in today's relatively small discussion to get through everyone's thoughts on the paper and on the associated areas.

So first, just an introductory question is what gets you excited to read and discuss this paper?

So thanks, everyone, for showing up and for those who are listening live and in replay.

And I'll tie that to the second question as well.

How can we learn and communicate the technical aspects of active inference in an accessible fashion?

so it's kind of like intention setting as we head into this relatively technical paper and indeed relatively technical area of active inference that draws on mathematics and computer science and a few other areas so again anyone can raise their hand but i'll give a first answer just think about what's something that gets you excited uh in terms of the content and then from a process-based perspective what is a way that we can learn communicate excessively

So let's go with Stephen first.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, this is interesting because I think this discussion came up on one of our conversations on our chats.

I think finding different ways in will give you different ways to communicate to the different people that you're talking to.

So I think active inference

needs to be connected to some process that people are familiar with in terms of how they make meaning in the world.

Otherwise, it's a big, big jump to build it all from first principles.


SPEAKER_00:
yes so definitely it's exciting to hear about things that we've heard about in a new perspective so i agree when we see keywords in an active inference paper and we know that it's going to be like familiar territory but approach from a different angle that's exciting any other thoughts there alex


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks.

For me it was interesting how we provide an example and the case for defining agent and generative model for this agent.

And so as a result to have simulation as possible way to... In a practical way when we usually discuss in papers here is like exact case for simulation.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.


SPEAKER_04:
Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
So I think a lot of things were exciting to me, but like computational psychiatry, that's a field like, what is that about?

Um, but I mean, it really just kind of hones in on like, maybe are we like a sum of input output that gives our effective state, like just direct results of our input.

And if so, like,

i don't know that it feels a little bit like brave new world-ish like are we gonna move toward you know control theory and optimization of that affective state it's kind of um just like crazy and a little bit scary to me yep from implicitly to explicitly steering others behavior and valence and affect sasha


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I just remember reading this paper when it came out earlier this year and thinking, like, what does affect have to do with agents?

And why is that important to model or to include mathematically?

And so that's been something

I'm still thinking about and yet very interested in the aspects of computational psychiatry.

And yet, I guess just on a deeper level reminds us that affect and mood are really important aspects of the human experience and not something to be ignored in favor of like bigger decision aspects that it really does matter.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, one thought on that is that in active inference, we're always talking about how everything is prediction.

And then we're always talking about how prediction isn't just a point estimate of what will happen.

It's actually a state estimate and an uncertainty about that estimate.

so you know i predict the giants are going to win the world series and i'm this certain about it or i'm not certain about it so it's always the state estimation and the uncertainty and so that uncertainty is the risk or the ambiguity depending on the context and then the state itself good versus bad is the valence

And so it's sort of like the affect, which is multidimensional, contains something about how good or bad it is.

And then orthogonally or independently, whether it's good or bad is whether you're confident or not.

And so you could be very confident about being happy or very confident about being sad.

Ryan, we see you joining.

Can you hear us?

Not sure while Ryan is figuring out his setup, but thanks Sasha for bringing up the computational psychiatry angle.

And I hope that Ryan will be able to fill us in soon.

Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this is a really important point because when we think about how things happen over time in this process, how that gets integrated, how we make sense, not just in some sort of snapshot about a situation, i.e.

we think this is a problem situation and then suddenly there's this emotional churn that's somehow a byproduct of that, but actually...

it's not a snapshot this ongoing process which seems incredibly impossibly complex is made all of it's made sense of because of affect and emotion it's not some freudian sort of repression that's sitting there in the background as a as a mistake but it's actually like the big game in town which is pretty revolutionary really


SPEAKER_00:
Interesting.

And also yet another transformation or sort of paradigm shift associated with thinking from a free energy perspective is rather than prioritizing the valence, the plus versus minus, and then having risk or ambiguity as a secondary layer, we can actually think about the ambiguity reduction as the primary drive, and then the plus and minus as falling out of the quest to reduce uncertainty, rather than uncertainty being an auxiliary factor in the quest to improve outcomes.

So it just shows how there's these two related dimensions of prediction, which is the state and the uncertainty.

And then we can think about how prioritizing one or the other is going to lead to different outcomes.

Ryan, we can see you raise your hand.

Can you talk?

Okay.

How about you can raise your hand and lower it in Morse code and we'll communicate with you that way.

But Ryan, thanks for trying.

And if it's not working with your current browser setup for whatever reason today, then we'll make sure to work it out with you in the interim and for next week and for following discussions.

We'll have you on unabated.

All right.

And here's our last warm-up question, which is something that you are wondering about or would like to have resolved by the end of today's discussion.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So I don't really expect this to be resolved, but I wonder instead of modeling, you know, to predict like positive or negative valence, like if there is a way to model like equanimity in this sense, like so neutral valence, like is that, I mean, what would drive that force?

And so I'm just kind of wondering as we dive deeper into the model, if that's going to become clear or not.


SPEAKER_00:
Can you explain what you mean by that and what other types of models might exist to think about that?


SPEAKER_03:
So just like how, you know, the results here were geared obviously toward, you know, pushing assets towards either a positive state or driving away from a negative state.

I mean, that's the, I assume the idea.

So,

What about driving toward a neutral state?

Like, is this something that's been considered, right?

Like, so, you know, overthinking tends to lead, like overthinking, like supposing about the future

leads to like, you know, these supposed negative thoughts.

And so then it's anxiety producing because you're worried about these negative thoughts.

Like, so that's overthinking or thinking like worst case scenario, perhaps, right?

So people do like a lot of thought redirection in this cognitive behavioral therapy.

Like people do thought redirection so that maybe you're thinking in not such a negative state, but in a more positive way, like, well, it could also be great, right?

Like, so there's that.

But what about like the non-thinking?

So if you non-think, could you lead to like a valence neutral, like valence equals zero to just have this kind of equanimity baseline that's like something maybe meditation achieves, right?

So like, can you work towards like non-think, maybe non-thinking is that valence neutral, right?

Like, so I don't know, how can that factor into computational psychiatry?

And has that been thought of before?

I don't know.


SPEAKER_00:
cool great question and so it's kind of like if we were going to be doing modeling of a car there's probably a lot of different ways that you could set up car crashes or cars that drive off the rails and we just want to know about what does it look like to have a computational psychiatry model that isn't just capturing a negative spiral

as overthinking progressively sort of accelerates but rather something that returns to a neutral attractor state or something that's related to mindfulness or attention to detail or abstraction but not hyper abstraction rumination but not hyper rumination so could the strange attractor be a neutral or even a healthy one not a delusionally positive or negative stephen


SPEAKER_01:
I suppose you could say that there's thousands and thousands of dimensions which are kind of sitting there as neutral, and you really notice it when you're not there and you've got to re-establish it.

So that's what they talk about in sense-making is when you're immersed in something, you don't do sense-making, but once something jolts you out of it, certain consciously, you might be doing unconscious sense-making, but at more of a conscious level, it's when you're surprised, basically, when things aren't,

going the way that your habitual understanding of them are.

And then suddenly, your cognition has got to kick in and say, Okay, how do I work out what is the sense of what I should be doing at the moment.

And that's when everything becomes transparent.

So it's, it's quite interesting to actually then see this now.

That again, taking that that thinking and

and that sort of abstract and bringing it right into the body and the and and the emotions as the kind of like the way of really knowing i mean in some ways is your mind checking in with your body was your body checking in with your mind cool very interesting about the mind and the body and always an important take um any other thoughts here or can we continue sasha


SPEAKER_02:
Another aspect of this paper I really liked is discussing the future clinical applications of understanding the mechanism of how certain existing therapies work, because there's a lot of different kinds of therapies out there.

Namely, I'm thinking of art therapy, but of course all other forms included, to start to understand why they work and by what mechanism they might be tapping into this kind of affective and predictive coding.

So I think that's really exciting.

And I also wonder who is fit to address those kinds of questions.

Is it medical professionals?

Is it psychologists?

Who is best suited for that role?

Because it's a very challenging subject to talk about without giving people perhaps incorrect medical advice or false hope.

And so that's just something that I'm curious about.

But

Don't want to step on any toes.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Let's keep that in mind.

And as Ryan joins and rejoins, but no need to send the Jitsi messages because we can hear it very loudly.

So let's just hope that Ryan can figure it out.

Otherwise, we'll take care of it for next week.

Cool.

Here we are in the paper for today, which is Sophisticated Affective Inference Simulating Anticipatory Affective Dynamics of Imagining Future Events.

And this was from October 2020 in the first International Workshop on Active Inference, or IY.

And I believe that more recently, like in the last couple of days, this has been codified into a book.

So we're using the ResearchGate version.

The aims and the claims of the paper were a bit rehearsed in 11.0.

So go and check that one out if you want a deeper dive into what the aims and the claims were.

But the big point of this paper was to take two bodies of previous work,

which was the sophisticated inference, which is sophisticated meaning deep through time, and then affective inference, affect being related to emotion and valence, and fusing these two threads into sophisticated affective inference, so deep through time and also involving affect.

And the big question from a non-active inference jargon perspective is how to model affective and anticipatory agents

course we're going to be thinking about that within the active inference framework and then we're going to be asking what features do these simulated agents display and then how does this carry out or connect to areas that are like psychiatry or cybernetics control theory all these fun things that we've been talking about in previous active streams how are we going to connect what we're learning about today something that's a recent development in only the last couple of months

this is the current developments.

So let's have fun.

Let's treat it as just an initial inroad and a connection between these two different areas.

Here's the abstract.

And again, it was read through in 11.0 and we're gonna just go more discussion oriented in the panels that we have.

But fundamentally in the abstract, they describe what I just said, that they combine those two different types of active inference models, sophisticated and deep parametric models.

And then they use a augmented Markov decision process.

Please know Jitsi chat if possible.

Thank you.

Ryan, we'll see you soon.

And then they give a minimal simulation at the end of a ruminating agent.

And that is where Blue was talking about the negative agent that sort of spirals off into negative affect.

Okay.

um the roadmap of the paper there's not that many stops not that many gas stations along the way it's also a short paper and i have it in this other tab if we want to go through it as it is as a paper because it's so clear and concise but what they do is introduce the ideas then show a couple figures that just summarize the model and show a table with what the formalisms were

At this point, does anyone have any thoughts or where do we want to go?

Like what was something that somebody thought structurally or from a topical perspective that they wanted to bring up?

Or it's okay if not.

All right, let's look at the figures and then use the figures as our scaffold for kind of understanding what they are up to in this paper and then understand why they did some of the things that they did and then what some of the next steps could be.

So here we are in figure one.

And figure one, does anyone want to point something out that they see first?

So feel free to just raise your hand any time.

In Figure 1, I've put red boxes around two pieces.

These are the two pillars that things are being built upon.

Here is the affective inference part, which we'll get to in a second.

And then in the middle is the task-specific sophisticated inference.

So that's deep inference here.

And then, as with a few other figures we've seen, time is moving from left to right.

Now, in this model, there are several boxes that are shaded, and that's because there's this recursive embedding of the models.

So we start with one single time point.

That's this up here on the top level of the model.

This is like the outer layer of the model.

It's kind of like the hour hand of the model you can think of.

And what's happening at each time point of the model itself is that the agent is doing a forecast through time.

So it's kind of like in the year 2000, you're doing a forecast for the next 100 years.

And then it's a recursive string because at 2000, you do an 100 year prediction.

And then 2001, you do an 100 year prediction.

So it's like at each time point, each big hour tick of the big model

we're going to be doing this recursive rolling out of predictions through time.

So that's the biggest structure of the model.

It's top level is the actual time.

That's the real what's happening in the world, we can think.

But then the agent is involved in this recursive anticipatory simulation.

And that's the deep or the sophisticated inference.

Now there's a few other elements to highlight.

And again, anyone can raise their hand at any time.

The first thing is that within this prediction through time, we've seen a couple elements here.

We've seen S, the states, A, how the hidden state estimates are mapped to observations.

We've also seen B, which is how the states change through time or are predicted to change through time.

Again, this is like happening within an instance of the agent.

we've also seen u which is how actions how policy maps on to the way that states change remember that policy enters the b matrix so states are being inferred and then we're inferring the b matrix which is basically how our policies affect how states influence uh how states change through time

Another notable feature here and slightly outside of the blue box, but in the gray box is this gamma or a precision parameter.

So as we do this rollout at a given instant and think ahead through time how things are gonna be, we're not just estimating the state rollout through time, we're also estimating our actions through time and how that influences states and how they change.

And a layer above that is this gamma, which is how sure am I about that?

That's this layer of precision in the estimate.

And that's coming through this G, which is related to the estimated free energy.

So again, for each moment of the rollout, the agent is estimating a bunch of things inside this model.

And then Steven, I'll get to you after I finish this last little bit.

And then in the moment, in the actual timeline of the agent, it is having affect.

And so these are the ways that these two models are combined.

And we can look at some more unpackings in other slides, but I just wanted to start with the actual figure used in the paper itself before going to another citation.

And the sophisticated inference is capturing this deep rollout at an instance with a precision estimator.

And the affective inference is capturing this affective state that carries forward in time.

And so combining affective and sophisticated inference is quite literally structurally combining the patterns of affective inference from this Hesp et al.

citation with the topological model structures of sophisticated inference.

We'll stay on here and continue thinking about it.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
So would I be right in saying that the affective

inference over time is is kind of looking at the shape of how actions look like they're going to turn out over time and and sort of putting a feeling to that in a simplistic term it's like there's it's not so you've got all these fairly discrete moments being looked at or assessed over time and the sort of the shape of that

is what the feeling is about, if that makes sense.

It's like, is it going, is it like, am I predicting this to be a roller coaster ride of uncertainty over the next few minutes?

Or am I expecting it to be smooth?

You know, because that would be the kind of the shape of the observations and the expectations as I stretch it out over time.

And that itself becomes something which is,

you know, has a generative model tracking it.

Would that be one way of saying it?


SPEAKER_00:
Great.

And thanks for phrasing it in the wording as it appears to you.

So let's start with that shape of the prediction.

That shape is actually the shape of a probability distribution.

It's the shape of the probability distribution that is a generative model.

and the shape of that it's kind of like a cloud of points or the bubble that encloses the cloud of points it's a shape that is existing let's just think initially in two dimensions so like a piece of paper and on the y-axis is going to be how rewarding is it lots of reward or negative reward and then the x-axis is precision from low precision to high precision

And so you could imagine that the shape could be all the way clustered up on the top right corner.

So that would be high expected reward, but high precision.

That's the best state.

The lowest state would be like the bottom left where it's like low expected reward and low precision.

So again, the reward prioritizing mindset says the agent's state should correspond to their state estimate.

The active inference perspective says, no, no, no.

The agent's affect is going to be related to their uncertainty estimate more so because if you have a small positive state estimate, but you're very precise, I'm going to give you $5 plus or minus one cent.

You say, great.

And if you say, I'm going to give you $5 plus or minus $25, you say, wait a minute, you're going to maybe take $20 from me?

Even if it's a very small chance, that isn't as good as getting 5 plus or minus 1.

And so this is where the state estimate and the precision estimator are orthogonal.

And so that's what delineates the shape of the distribution that is the generative model of the future.

in a traditional computational psychology model again agent affect would be tracked by the state estimate if it's above zero expected then you're good if it's below zero it's bad whereas in the active inference framework good affect is going to be associated with precise estimates and anxiety negative affect is going to be associated with high uncertainty

And so as this agent runs simulations going forward and rolling them out, we can look at what that looks like.

Even if the expected reward is positive, if the ambiguity is high, the uncertainty is high, it can be anxiety producing.

So that is what we're really tracking is there's the structure of this model, which is like the topology or the connectedness of how different variables influence each other in the model.

But then the outcome of all of this is the shape of the distribution of the prediction of the agent.

And that's respectively just like all predictions are about state as well as uncertainty.

So estimate about the world states, the hidden states in the world, and then a metacognitive estimate of our precision.

And so it's like, this is one click through time.

And then the agent acts, but it's simulating its future actions at this moment.

And then the actual model clicks over.

And then it's in the next time step for the agent, and it starts simulating from that moment going forward.

And so that's one of the features that is something that's a hallmark of this model is it's like the game that's being played has a net positive return.

And let's just assume that we had a degree of agency.

We could probably choose small winning outcomes within this game that we're about to show.

However, by spiraling and by ruminating deep through time,

the agent starts thinking about potential roads that are highly rewarding, as well as a small fraction of paths that are very negative.

And then the uncertainty in that distribution, the spread on the x-axis or the higher uncertainty on the x-axis is actually leading to it being anxiety producing, even if the state estimate is positive.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this supports some of the challenges we also find with

you know, if you see the numbers for the stock market, you can get this sense of full sense of certainty that we all know what's going on.

And it gives us for some people that can make them quite relaxed and confident.

And here I go, you know, bullish, as we might say.

And this would sort of support that sense of like,

um if you're given this high level of supposedly precision and um supposed um accuracy and reliability you could get a full sense of of that and and that could be where you know at the same time people challenge that and look at like we need to blow that apart because you know if you if if the confidence in that suddenly disappears and you see it as not being as precise as you thought

the anxiety rises greatly and other ways of thinking might need to be thought, come into play.


SPEAKER_00:
cool good connection there with decision making in markets which are very related to not just estimates of value but estimates of volatility and uncertainty estimates about value and about volatility and so then you have people trading vix you know trading the volatility index or leveraging that and so these are like higher level ambiguity about ambiguity or risk about risk

and then all of that is associated with valence is it a good trade or a bad trade and so that's like coming back to sasha's question about valence and affect it's sort of like well there's so many layers and ways that you could leverage trading but then in the end it's like right but am i going to do action a or not is it going to be a or b is it a good trade or not and that implicitly entails

preferences, like I want to see my number of Bitcoin go up, not down.

But if you didn't have that preference, which is part of the C matrix, which is not shown here as part of the G, if you didn't have a preference, then you wouldn't know which policy to partake in.

Like if you don't know where you're going, every step is a losing step.

But then with a preference vector C, you can actually ask, is this trade a good one or a bad one?

And that is not just is the expected value above zero.

Again, that's rewardlandia.

That's reward first, uncertainty as a satellite.

We're taking uncertainty first, and we still want to partake in preference-guided policy selection.

So instead of doing preferences to reward maximization, and then we'll deal with the uncertainty later, it's like, let's go from preference to policy selection with ambiguity as the heart of what we're doing.

and reward will fall out as a function of reducing uncertainty about optimal action in the world given our preferences and affordances.

So this is sort of the simple rearranging of ideas and reconfiguring that leads to some of these innovative insights in Active Inference.

Steven?


SPEAKER_01:
just adding something into that is it also shows it can work the other way.

I know someone who does trading and he has to monitor his heart rate.

They do a whole thing where he does some relaxing and measures the heart rate and that before doing the work so that the state of the body doesn't

mask what's actually going on you know so this also shows that you know if your physical state and your you know emotional state is is is out of whack in any way your your ability to to do this deep inference might be skewed or even you know uh

lost because the top level in the diagram is not necessarily tapping into the real data it's just tapping into the the the values about context arousal valence etc that is just in the whole system for the person


SPEAKER_00:
Correct.

And there's a lot of behavioral research not done in the active inference framework that shows like when people are in a pessimistic framework, they might be more willing to satisfy with like a smaller gain in the short term.

Whereas when somebody is feeling like abundance or optimistic or confident about their success, they might be able to delay gratification and

partake in larger gains in the future.

And so if you have somebody who's carrying over from the other tab, quite literally, negative affect or adversarial affect about the world, and they flip over their trading account, they're going to be making different kinds of decisions based upon their affective state.

That's going to carry into their estimates of precision, which is related to anxiety, higher precision, lower anxiety.

Those two are negatively correlated.

And then again, in this caption, the imagined action model, precision actions and states and outcomes, everything inside of the gray and the blue box is inside the mind of an agent at a moment.

And so this is the rollout inside of the mind of an agent at a moment.

Let's look at figure two and talk about this game that they actually simulate out.

So this is four-state game.

There's a lot of games that you could simulate, but this is just one game.

And each of the edges reflect transitions that are possible.

So you start on square one, and then you can either move to square two or square three with some probability.

and you start out with a gain of zero it's a neutral state you can go to a safe small gain so if you're just wanting to play it safe you could hang out and go between one and two however also you can go to this high gain three

Now three, you're getting twice as much money.

However, there's a one in three chance that you're going to, or depending on how these edges are parameterized, I should say, there's a chance that you can move into this absorbing state that's painful.

And so the two adjectives there are painful, so it has a negative reward of negative two.

and it's absorbing because you see that it can also uh swallow your trajectory like once you end up in four it's sort of like a negative state and so there are absorbing states in the world like

Death, let's say.

Once you hit this state, you're staying in that state.

And so the agent is starting here.

And so it's like, which square should I walk on to get the most money or something like that?

And so if it just walks around, it's going to end up here really quickly and get into this painful absorbing state.

And so it's thinking, okay, there's some paths I can imagine where I just walk back and forth between one and two.

There's some other paths where I walk around on one, two, three.

I'm just getting money or neutral in every step.

And so what it's doing here is time 1.

It's saying, well, on my next move, I could go to 1, 2, or 3.

And I could go to 4, but actually this edge isn't there, so it's not likely.

So the first step, it's literally all good.

Your expectation is either 1 or 2.

So your kind of estimate is a mean of 1 and 1 half with a small variance.

Okay, but now here, if you stay on one and then continue on one, now you're getting this path at time point three would give you zero.

Here you'd have $1 total, zero, zero, one.

Here you'd have $3 total.

Here you'd have plus one, zero.

So one, two, four.

Here you'd have two plus two is four.

So you're getting all these estimates.

Now you have some fours, but you also have some negative twos and some negative fours.

So as you're rolling out this simulation,

At each time point, actually the expectation is getting higher because if you think about it, you can get negative two or plus two, that cancels out, and then plus one.

So each game you play, each step, the expectation is going to strictly grow.

However, the variance is also going to strictly grow.

And so this is related to a few other probability games where it's like,

will you play this game where we gamble?

And then it's like double or nothing, following double or nothing.

It's like the St.

Petersburg gamble.

It has another name as well.

And the reason why people don't pay infinite money to play these games with an infinite expected value is because the variance is so high.

And so what's happening is as the agent is rolling out in its mind,

these possible trajectories and this could be like chess trajectories or it could be like action selection policies or trades as it's rolling these out the variance is increasing and so that's making it anxious

That's sort of the heart of what's happening.

And then as we trace out the time steps of the model, this is again, just one trace of the simulation.

They're not exploring every parameter, but this is very illustrative.

What happens is that in the first couple of hundred time points of the model,

the valence is good the agent is feeling good it's feeling good about ending up in large reward states and it has a fairly precise model on action and a small fraction of an of the imagined events are negative 0.04 but then what starts happening is because that negative state is absorbing

you get more and more trajectories lining up on this right side where it's like four as an absorbing state and so that is making that uh making the uncertainty strictly rise so around 500 we have this phase transition where the precision on the agent's estimate drops rapidly it's like yeah i'm not sure what's going to happen after 500 time points because there's some paths that are just super bad there's some that are super good

So when it was one time point, I was like pretty sure I was going to get $1 or $2 and I felt great.

But now that you're asking me to predict 500 time points out, I don't know if I'm going to have $100,000 or be $100,000 in debt.

And that's actually getting me anxious that I don't know the precision.

And so again, if someone said, hey, don't worry about the future because the expected value is gonna be positive $1,000.

That's not $1,000 in my pocket.

That's a precise $1,000.

If somebody says the expected value is $1,000, but it has a huge variance, it's gonna be anxiety producing.

And so even though the threat perception is inching up from 0.04 to 0.1, so it still is not more than a 10% barely chance of these highly threatening events happening.

it turns out that the uncertainty is what drives the valence, not the percentage of negative events.

And then also, interestingly, and this could be over-reading into one trace of the model, but the phase transition and the precision and valence happen at exactly the same time, around 500, right before 500.

Interestingly, the threat perception is going down overall, leading up to 500, and then it starts kicking up again.

That's sort of like, okay, I drank all the coffee.

I'm feeling great.

It's like, oh no, I'm starting to get a little tired.

That coffee's not gonna work.

That quantitative easing is not gonna work.

And so even though the threat perception actually isn't as high as it has been,

the precision being so low leads to the valence being negative because the valence is being derived again from the anxiety, from the uncertainty, not from the expected value.

This is like a point we can always return to because it's a great example of the complementarity of traditional reward centric understandings of reward learning and this more precision guided understanding of action selection in the niche.

Okay.

Any thoughts on those figures?

That's sort of the contribution of the paper in many ways is just to make this combination model that features the affective inference of the agent in their timeline.

And then at each moment, this imagined rollout.

And yeah, it's a discrete time model.

And yeah, any thoughts or questions or there's more stuff we can continue to look through.

Cool, so just to put it up there and anyone can raise your hand.

Table one has some of the mathematical details.

So hopefully with Ryan and any other authors next week, we'll be able to talk about these details.

And here is that gamma, which is one over the precision.

So sometimes you'll hear about it as,

precision maximizing.

Other times you'll hear about it as uncertainty minimizing.

And those two, the min and the max, are related by this one over feature.

Just one point.

So it's kind of like on networks,

there's one type of problem called the max flow.

Like you want to have flow through a network, internet or water or resources.

And so you might want to know what the cut is that's going to be most damaging or the least damaging to the network.

And so sometimes the most and the least are related by this one over feature.

Um, okay.

Any thoughts?

Because there's a lot of formalisms we can continue to walk through and we have a good amount of time, but like maybe just pausing here, what would be something you would say to somebody who had never heard of active inference and just what is something that it captures that other models haven't captured or something that you'd be excited to see it head in the direction towards Steven.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, I think the counterintuitive nature and the ability for things to be unexpectedly stable and unexpectedly transition is something that I don't know of in a way that traditional models of the world

would show you, you know, because, you know, you could be like, oh, people would normally either just take one of those moments and then that gets extrapolated for everything.

But actually you need to follow it over time because it matters a lot.


SPEAKER_00:
It does, and it needs to be kind of through time in two ways.

The actual agent needs to be progressing through time, but at each time point, the agent needs to be simulating time points of the past, present, and future.

And so that's this like double timeline that's happening with the model's topology here.

is you could have another pink box right next to this one and that would be like the next time point of the agents but it's like right now it's 10 a.m and i'm looking ahead to 10 11 12 and then it's 11 and then i'm thinking ahead again but i'm also looking back and all of that is being spun out of a generative model of a trajectory stephen


SPEAKER_01:
yeah that's and i thought it was interesting i haven't seen a positive valence and a negative valence i haven't seen sort of two dynamics mapped alongside each other simultaneously normally there's just the one so i thought that's something that's kind of uh the good and bad as two you know it's not just about good

it's about the blending of good and bad i thought that's good so you i mean theoretically you could have loads of variants of that you know you could have good the bad the ugly yep yep valence just like uh an electron or a proton you know valence of plus or minus


SPEAKER_00:
that's plus to minus positive negative valence but affect is a multi-dimensional landscape and so that is something that could be explored in a higher dimensional way but again let's think about that trading example there's so many ways oh it's an elegant trade it's an ugly trade it was a clumsy one it was a uh one with very much foresight or it was a retributive trade all these adjectives but then what does it boil down to given my preferences and my affordances was it a good trade and

And that, if your preferences are, hey, I have too much money, I'm trying to sponsor a couple people who have less crypto than me, then a quote good trade given that preference vector might not look like a preference or a policy selected by somebody with a different preference.

So that is where agent-specific preferences come into play, is you're never going to get away from that.

The agent is not doing this neutral calculation followed by a secondary step of policy selection.

The preferences for policy and for outcomes are entrenched within the kernel of this model at every single time step.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
And that gives a plausible Bayesian route to your gut feeling.

I mean, some of those...

emotions like you're saying the an elegant trade might be kind of a cognitive process and uh and uh some other type of part of it might be kicking your deep you know there's certain times when you're thinking about stuff and then suddenly you get a sinking feeling in your stomach you know and it's like well that that um that who knows where that's coming from but this gives a you only get one overall

sort of gut feeling you only get one overall sort of route to actively infer how to take action in the world and all these different things they only become available to you when you maybe reflect on it later and you have to describe what why you had that gut feeling like you just mentioned

There could be hundreds of different things all being Bayesianly integrated.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

And that's this go, no go.

Hey, I'm just not feeling good about this, this whole vacation, or I'm just feeling really great.

I don't know what's behind the door number four, but I'm feeling great about it.

That valence aspect of prediction for the future is like the highest level control summary statistic.

It's like, are we going to accept this person into the college or not?

so many other dimensions but it gets distilled into the choke point through the markov blanket of action it gets distilled into go or no go on that specific person or that specific policy or that specific outcome and so that's actually the justification for the use of valence as a simple positive to negative even though there's so many other dimensions to affect overall and

it does get distilled into this gut feeling which you can go into and and uh you can cognize you can add adjectives on top but it's sort of interesting it's like is the gut feeling just positive versus negative and when you introspect do you get higher and higher levels of abstracted polysyllabic emotions or do you get deeper and deeper into your body

and into increasingly summary statistics like go, no go, freeze, fight.

These are things like go and no go.

Let's look through a couple.

Oh, Sasha, go ahead.


SPEAKER_02:
That's kind of what I was thinking is

with this model of valence, would a human participant, let's say, be able to self-report in the similar way about their valence during an experience?

Or is this kind of like the...

hidden by the Markov blanket and we can have these models to help explain what was happening at the time, but those states might be unaccessible to people actually experiencing this decision-making process.

And yeah, it just reminds me of, I guess, how people spend money and thinking about economic decisions that people make that are either logical or not logical, and that it really has little to do with the

money that we have and then the mindset that we have about the money and like how we ought to be spending it and um you know who we want to be supporting or not with our uh investment decision and yeah it just really uh i don't know it it's at such a higher level than um just thinking about someone's salary it's how they interact with the economic system and um

what role they might play in it.

And it just, especially in the holidays, like all I can think is we're so deeply influenced by times and like season and tradition with how we choose to how and where we choose to spend money.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.

You send money.

You literally give money away to people on their birthday, on their biorhythm or, you know, in the holiday season.

And then also what you just said, Sasha, reminded me of like coarse graining estimates and why it's so important.

If your economic estimate that you're making is will we have enough or not?

you might be very confident that you'll have enough.

Say, I don't know the details, but I'm confident that we'll have enough.

Or even, I'm confident we're not going to have enough and we're going to have to do XYZ policy.

Okay, we can work with that.

But if you're trying to do an estimate down to the cent, you might have a very noisy estimate.

And then,

Apparently people can get quite anxious about relatively small amounts of money that are way up there in the big salary range.

Is it going to be this number or a slightly higher or a slightly smaller number?

So there's this jockeying and uncertainty up there at the high level because they're doing a nine figure precision estimate with a large variance.

Whereas there's something to be said for coarse graining and simplifying and functionalizing it.

and actually not just reducing the cognitive load, but increasing the precision of our estimate, even if the state estimate is inferior.

So there's so much there to continue exploring.

Let's just walk through some more of these formalisms because most of this paper, we can just scroll through it just to show you, but it's 10 pages long, including references.

And basically they introduce, give that figure one that we just looked at, give figure two that we just looked at, give the table we looked at,

show the results for figure three and there's the whole paper so short very very short so let's go into these two citations underlying the paper centrally and then just find out what they might show us and we're going to be talking about deeply felt affect in april i believe so again sophisticated affective inference is drawing the affect from this left side and the temporal depth from the right side

Three areas we could imagine this area of research heading towards would be more advanced simulations.

So agents that are simulating in continuous time or with higher dimensional action policies, just like we've seen from ACT-INF 8 with scaling active inference or towards the computational psychiatry angle, something that Ryan Smith and others have written review papers about and a lot of empirical work as well.

So we'll hear more about that next time.

And then there's this angle of the models for robotics,

which is like, what if the drone had a top level summary statistic that's just like, is this mission going well or not?

And if not, then that might engage some policies like head back home or pause or land or get to safety.

But that's a top level summary statistic that even robots might be able to utilize.

And I know that some people are doing that kind of stuff.

So in sophisticated inference, and this is to bridge the gap between the formalisms and the actual sentences that are driving us, we're gonna kind of write it in a little bit of a hybrid script, like a rebus.

So the big question that agents are trying to answer in the world and in sophisticated inference is how can we have the best policy over a given time horizon?

So not what's the best chess move now,

It's what's the best chess move over the time horizon that I'm considering.

And tied up in that question about evaluating the best policy over a given time horizon is the question of what are the consequences of policies through time and how do we estimate that?

What is our estimate?

And what that is related to, how we benchmark, how we compare policies and their consequences is specifically related to how we understand observations being mapped to hidden states and our policy, which is how our actions are influencing the way that hidden states change between each other.

That's that B matrix.

And the generalized free energy, which is this Parr and Friston citation, so another citation link away from the IY paper, is that the generalized free energy basically consists of one model that conditions on policies and then asks about how state transitions occur.

So conditioning on me exercising every day, what kind of state transitions can I expect to see in the world?

And then the second part of the free energy is conditioning on states

What policies should be selected?

So this is the two stroke engine.

Condition on what I know about the world, world states and causal model of the world, generative model of the world.

What is my policy selection?

That's the control theory.

That's the cybernetic side.

That's the action side, action looking side.

then this first part is again conditioning on my policies in the world what are the state transitions and how do those change and there's more nuance because of course we're just describing it in natural language but this is sort of the broad outline one half of free energy conditions on policy the other part um selects policy and basically vice versa with state transitions

And so here's related to this Q and P, which we saw in tail of two densities.

We talked about it again in integrating internalism and externalism.

Q conditions on policy.

That's a vertical line P. You're estimating O and S through T, through time, as conditioned on P. And then P is conditioned on states.

So again, we're conditioning on two different parts, and that's also how we end up using this two-stroke engine to do inference in complex settings.

We also talked about amortized inference, but don't wanna go into that here.

Blue, this is the slide that always makes me think about you with where's the information gain and could the pure information gaining agent get reward or does the pure reward seeker gain information?

And like, where is this interplay between the intrinsic values

or the salience, and then the intrinsic value in the novelty.

So the way that these two and all these different features and the different representations, I mean, there's so much to say about and think here.

But Stephen, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah could you just go back to that the one where you put those two terms between action the generative model and the that one yeah see that's kind of interesting that generative model says state transitions policies and policies final states so policies final states is probably a bit more action and like least energy route and the other one maybe is a bit more generative model is a bit more

processing sensory data is a bit more cognitive sort of feely cognition if that makes sense I'd like that if that if that's correct but I is it like you've got like a perception action part to those two in a way one's a bit more perception heavy one's a bit more action heavy or let's return to that in a second blue


SPEAKER_03:
So I just wanted to comment while we're here about what you had said in the introduction video related to why are we always trying to estimate the states when really we should be trying to estimate the best policy, right?

That's what we should be predicting.

We're not trying to predict the states.

Bring three jackets instead of one jacket, and then you'll always be at the right temperature.

If we prepare versus trying to predict the state of what's going to be, I think that that just was a neat thought that occurred to me.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

When there's too much emphasis on precise estimates of world states,

it's implicitly like we're focusing so much on precise estimates of world states that we'll just know what to do when we have that precise estimate it's like that's not true it turns out that maybe again a one digit of precision or even uh to the nearest 10 of the temperature from a policy perspective you'll be fine if it's um 20 celsius plus or minus 10 you might be fine within a broad range of world state predictions from an action selection policy

because your action selection could be, cool, I'll throw a jacket in my backpack and then I'll be fine, whatever it is.

And so that is this two-stroke engine, this handoff or handshake between co-estimating states and their transitions, like weather in the world and the transitions between different weather states in the world, given what you know about weather.

We're not on Mars.

It's not gonna do a acid rainstorm at 400 degrees.

So it's like, given what we know about the distributions of the niche, the statistical regularities of the niche,

We want to be co-estimating states and our action, action and perception.

And we want to be doing that in a way that suffices, that's adequate to remain within our preferred areas, our preferred strange attractors, where we're able to basically have reduced uncertainty about the things that we care about, the physiological variables that matter, like our temperature.

And okay, so it is very cool.

And again, just for those who haven't seen these kinds of equations that much, the vertical line means conditions on, and then whatever follows it, you can think of is like fixed.

So it's like you have a spreadsheet and let's just say that the rows are policies and the columns are like state transitions.

And so when you fix on one, it's like you pick out, you fix a column, and then you're asking about the distribution of that vector fixed on that column.

And similarly, you could fix a row, select one row, condition on one row, and then ask about the distribution in that line going across.

so that's the full matrix and also that's related to what's called marginal likelihood in bayesian statistics the margin is literally the margin of the page when they used to do it with physical pages so it's like rows by columns and the marginal likelihood is related to the margin of the page which is just so fun it's kind of like a floppy disk icon but for statistics um

Here's another cool piece of the sophisticated inference paper.

And I think there's a lot I'd like to learn and ask here to Casper and others, but this formulation of policy P, PI selection, people can see my red thing, right?

pi is related to the argument minimization of free energy of policy so this is saying the policy that gets selected pi is going to be like a free energy minimization of g as a function of all the policies that could be done so of my affordances we're going to do a free energy minimization and that's how i'm going to select my policy okay well what is g of pi

g of pi is related to the expectation of what?

Risk minus ambiguity.

So high risk is going to be a higher number, and that's worse.

In this case, it's like golf.

We want to minimize the free energy.

And so we're jointly trading off and there's some natural logs and some negative natural logs.

So it's sometimes a little bit hard to see if you're going like up or downhill, which is why it's so important to have it phrased like this.

But basically risk is bad and ambiguity is bad, but it turns out with the natural logs that you can just think of them as being combined.

So it's like, if we seek to maximize our precision, minimize risk, minimize ambiguity,

what we'll be doing is actually a strict bound on the intrinsic value and the extrinsic value so this formulation of search of information gain related to risk and ambiguity turns out to be strictly bounded by this value-driven process so

worldview related to reward you see that agents are reward seekers and uncertainty is something that they just simply deal with or they figure out or they thrive despite in the active inference perspective agents are uncertainty reducers who obtain rewards and if they don't they die that's evolution and so we're putting risk and uncertainty first and so instead of saying like well the agent predicts value and that ends up reducing its uncertainty about the world

we're actually saying, no, it's a way more tractable calculation for the agent to be reducing its uncertainty about action.

Again, not just about states of the world, but the agent is reducing its uncertainty about action through action.

It's performing optimal foraging experimentation in order to reduce its uncertainty about best actions.

And it turns out that that is going to have a bound.

It's always going to be converging towards this perfect trade-off between intrinsic and extrinsic value.

And special cases fall out of this where certain variables are basically fixed to zero.

So if you have no prior at the beginning and you just let it start

uh kind of draw from your first observations you take those and you use that as your first hyper prior that's like the parametric empirical base

And in this case, you end up recapitulating several things from Bayesian statistics like optimal Bayesian design or just surprise.

And then similarly, if you set the ambiguity to zero, so like the case in active inference eight, where the states were perfectly observable, like the pendulum and the mountain car, it wasn't like it was getting a noisy estimate of where it was on the mountain.

It knew exactly where it was on a mountain.

And in the case of no ambiguity about states, again, ambiguity is the P distribution of observations given states.

So that's like, given that it's daytime, am I seeing photons?

So if you have no ambiguity about that, then this term is zero, right?

Which makes risk minimization the imperative.

And that's why when you get no ambiguity, you find that this whole framework collapses into risk control.

Whereas if you had risk collapse to zero, like it's a no risk situation, the only imperative would be reduction of ambiguity.

So now let's think about that in reward land.

If you didn't have to seek value, it could be purely novelty based search.

Whereas if the only imperative were to obtain short-term value, you would not expect that kind of agent to be engaged in a creative search.

So it's sort of like each of these are phrasings, whether risk minus ambiguity or intrinsic minus extrinsic value, you can see how either one of them could be like,

zeroed out and what that would do for the other side or you could imagine in realistic situations where they're sort of like tied up in a specific way so again you could imagine a no risk scenario a no ambiguity scenario no intrinsic or no extrinsic any of these combinations we'll do stephen and then sasha


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, this is really good the way you're putting this together here and explaining it.

I think also obviously these things, sometimes they become really clear when it's an extreme case and then you've got this blending that's going on.

It's not fully any one of these.

But I think that no ambiguity piece is a useful one to think about what happens sometimes when

well, you could say, I don't know if you'd say Trump, but in the politics, when something is, if people say these people are bad,

and you know you often see that even at work and it's a no-brainer things are said to be a no-brainer then suddenly everyone the the the intrinsic value of trying to explore other options is can be collapsed in people and they just go with the extrinsic value of gain because there's no there's supposedly no ambiguity and i think that that could

be interested in social.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Yep.

Like we know exactly how dangerous this virus is.

There's no discussion about what the risk minimizing policy is.

Oh, wait a minute.

Is there Sasha?


SPEAKER_02:
Okay.

Very leading questions.

In hearing this description, just really thinking about using this to define play.

And really seeing play as the combination of factors that has very low risk, but like high value of exploration.

And so setting up things that have low risk, but high opportunities for curiosity, that would be, I guess, for me fit into the category of play.

So that's a good way to think about it.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
another fun part there is like when value is the imperative it's difficult to be exploratory and creative it's like maslow's hierarchy of needs but then when there can be the space where you can actually engage in a novelty or a curiosity guided search kind of the prerequisite the enabling feature of that is sufficiency at a material level

So that isn't simply related to reward.

We don't just give people reward, kind of dial up their dopamine, and then they'll be acting creatively.

It's actually like we need to scaffold the agent in the environment in a way where it can reduce its risk so that it can tolerate higher ambiguity or reduce ambiguity so that we can engage with higher risk scenarios.

So sometimes these combinations of features, even though risk and ambiguity, they're just English words.

So really it is about the formalism, but it helps us reimagine and repartition and fluidly move across partitionings for how to think about these nuanced control problems.

Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Also, it makes me think about how this is commonly studied, like in psychology lab spaces and

Yeah, really thinking about how using this framework to figure out what would make the participants, what state that would put them in, as well as how

they feel about the risk and ambiguity of the situation that they're in, because depending on how you feel about participating in research, that would change what state of exploration or curiosity you might be in.

And that, I don't know, it just really makes me rethink a lot of research in this field because it's ignoring, or I guess, excluding one of the key variables of this process.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And it makes me think about safe spaces, but we could also say, how risky is this space?

That's sort of related to safety.

Those are like one over each other, you know, risk equals one over safety, but also how ambiguous is this space?

We want this space to be safe, so not risky, but we also want this space to be not ambiguous.

We want to be clear and communicating about what this space is.

However, we don't want to make it so unambiguous there's no room to play.

So we want to have the optimal level of ambiguity and risk.

That's controlled novelty.

That's Pareto optimality.

That's free energy minimization.

That's living on the frontier between performance and innovation.

So that's where all these models can take us.

And that's why it re-imagines the bottom up versus top down, the explore versus exploit.

the maximization in the long-term versus the short-term, those are all coming from the reward mentality.

And when we think about the situated agent reducing uncertainty about action through action, we have a whole new set of ways to talk about these questions.

Stephen, you're then blue.


SPEAKER_01:
And bringing it back as well with this paper and the way it talks about the temple depth and is it can also combine with this give a way to think about what they call stages of readiness.

Because people sort of think, oh, they could read this and like, okay, we've made it safe.

I've said it's safe.

I've told everyone it's safe.

Well, it might be you've told them it's safe and you've demonstrated it's safe and the environment's been safe, but it might be five minutes, it might be three weeks of training before people start to

bring that safety into the way that they balance these different parameters.

And it could be that it crashes quite rapidly, positive or negatively, as we saw earlier with the way that the dynamics work.

And that shows the importance of facilitation and the importance of the way the space is set up, the safety between participants and all that sort of stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So I know that you said we're not going to unpack the formalism of the intrinsic value and the extrinsic value, or at least you said that on the intro video.

But those two things, it makes me think the special cases really.

They talked about no intrinsic value, but what about no extrinsic value?

It just always reminds me of what about just exploring for info gain or just out of curiosity to satisfy that for intrinsic value?


SPEAKER_00:
i did note that i was like waiting for i was like okay no risk no ambiguity um then no intrinsic it's like the next one and uh i wondered if that actually was related to maximum entropy so it's like given a distribution if you have no preferences for value then you're just sampling your preference is to sample the distribution unadulterated and so that is like max info game max ent

sampling neutrally without preference across a distribution.

And so that's very related to statistical sampling techniques because those computer algorithms have been designed actually without a preference vector in mind just to sample distributions like Monte Carlo Markov chain methods.

And so now we're taking a sampling agent, you're sampling temperatures, but you don't want just all temperatures for that distribution.

You want to sample repeatedly from body temperature.

However, there might be another distribution where you do want to have a very, very exploratory sampling pattern.

just see if there's any other interesting stuff so here is from sophisticated inference uh another kind of rollout and then here we can see observations and then there's different actions that can be taken and each of those actions would lead to different observations and so on and so it gets exponentially large and this is just like early chess algorithms they used to do if this then that if this then that and they would do these rollouts and then they'd prune this branch oh that doesn't look that good so i'm not going to explore that way

And since those sort of tree pruning chess algorithms, there's been many developments in chess and other algorithms for this kind of decision-making.

And so here's the structure of the model and here's that rollout.

And then one big question is how can we look down the branches that are most informative, not just fantasize and dream about the one in a billion branches that's the best,

not negatively ruminate and get dwelling on the one branch that's the worst.

But how can we sample information across this branching tree pattern in a way that leads to effective action in the world?

And then here's another integrative plot that they made, which is showing that basically there's a few ways to think about active inference, what it's doing.

Here, it's minimizing risk and minimizing ambiguity, okay?

So that's related to this phrasing on the top.

Minimize risk, minimize ambiguity, okay?

Make it safe, make it clear.

Positive way of saying it, the negative way is minimize risk, minimize ambiguity.

So policies, states, observations.

States are the hidden part of the world.

Observations, you know, photons on my retina, policies, where my eyes move.

And so the risk framing is you should be minimizing free energy in a way that reduces risk and ambiguity about this chain that connects policy states and outcomes.

Another branch of active inference is actually sort of like a yin and yang.

This is like a push-pull.

It's saying minimize the entropy of the distribution of outcomes.

So achieve...

predictable outcomes, reduce big reduction on there and expands here with the information gain.

And so instead of, hey, do something that's like creative, but FYI, don't be risky and don't be ambiguous.

Here is like, be as clear as you can and predictable as you can the outcomes while being as info gain and creative as you possibly can.

And so I like this because it's sort of like instead of two things that you wanna run away from, and then hopefully you become creative in the gap, this is like something to run away from and something to run towards.

So it rephrases that risk and ambiguity minimization as actually a push-pull of a minimization of surprise about observations and a maximization of the information gain given the policies that can be carried out.

So I kind of like that graphic.

And then, just in this last couple minutes, Casper and several other authors will be on in early April, hopefully before then as well, for Act Inf 19, and that will be pretty cool.

But here's where they walk step by step.

M1, at each time step, the agent is inferring how hidden states are related to outcomes.

then we see that S, A, O mapping, and now we have this, and D is the initial states.

Now we're going to take this single time point model and use B to ask how states change through time.

Then we're going to take M2, that state's changing through time, and put it within a bigger model of M3, which is action.

So policy is influencing how states change their time, the B matrix.

Policy is being selected by what?

Minimization of free energy, G. How do we calculate minimized free energy?

Including a preference vector, C.

And then we have a prior over policies.

This is related to the affordances.

So now we're not just doing state prediction at a moment, but through time, M1 and M2, and we're going to be doing policy selection on that right now.

And then where we got to in sophisticated affective inference was this M4 layer, which is state observation mappings through time or at a given moment and through time with the A and the B and choosing policy using our C preference vector and G, the minimizing of free energy.

And about that free energy, we're gonna have a precision.

We're gonna have a prior on our precision.

This is our metacognition.

And here's where valence enters the picture, which is anxiety bad.

Anxiety comes from high uncertainty.

So if you have high precision on free energy, you're going to feel better.

If you have low uncertainty or low certainty about free energy, it's going to lead to anxiety.

Not because the expected value of the outcomes is negative.

So not within that reward first mindset, but in the precision first mindset, even a positive expected value with a high variance can be anxiety producing.

So we kind of return to the paper as being the summation of these two citations building before, just like so many other papers are building on citations.

It's always just like tips of icebergs all the way down, Markov citation blankets all the way down.

and we can ask our kind of usual sets of questions and people can provide their closing thoughts or questions or what would they like addressed in 11.2 next week?

Just what's something fun that anyone or each of you thought about today?

then also to kind of maybe even close on a note about how we can have accessible formalisms for active inference and include people in the discussion who speak math or not who speak english or not so how do we communicate it make it exciting build those bridges to other areas any closing thoughts on that stephen


SPEAKER_01:
Lots of really good stuff.

I mean, I suppose there's some elements of this where I'd love to find a way.

I'm trying to find a way to take people into an activity where...

you know, well, I suppose some of us do that, you know, with play or with an exploration, different types of exploration activities that maybe illustrate some of these and then they get unpacked after because it may be just some of this stuff is in its nature pretty involved, but that's still good.

So I like the way you've been describing it, but maybe there's, yeah, maybe there's something then that this now bridges with something else that's experiential.


SPEAKER_00:
Anyone else have a thought on that?

Yeah, I think that the questions I would like to have the authors or anyone familiar with the formalism help us on would be, how can we communicate and understand the differences between partitioning risk and ambiguity this way or that way?

How do we know what to apply in what scenario?

How does it change how we act?

How does it change how we model systems?

How would we infer it in a system?

How do we disconnect the qualia, the experience of surprise, uncertainty, ambiguity, risk, valence,

How do we disconnect from the qualia so that we can apply it to systems that are on the other side of our Markov blanket, systems that we are not experiencing, but are acting in a way, in an intentional stance way, they're acting as if they had these kinds of attributes.

Well, if there's any other thoughts, we can definitely hear it, but otherwise, very excellent discussion.

Wait, Stephen, do you have another point?

Oh, so everyone, thanks for the awesome discussion.

There's a feedback form in the calendar invite if you'd like to take a look and fill that out.

Otherwise, people who are watching it live and in replay, thanks so much.

It means a lot to us.

And we hope to hear your questions, hear your thoughts so that we can address them in 11.2.

And thanks so much for a great 2020.

We are almost there.

This is the penultimate active stream.

So everyone, thanks so much.

And we'll talk later.

## gx9yAF607ko

SPEAKER_00:
Hello everyone.

Welcome to the Active Inference live stream.

It is Active Inference live stream 11.2 on December 29th, 2020.

This is our last group Active Inference live stream of the year.

So thanks so much everyone who is out here today and also watching live for those who are.

And I will share my screen for the participants.

And here we go.

welcome to the active inference lab everyone we are an experiment in online team communication learning and practice related to active inference you can find us at our website on twitter email youtube or our public keybase team and username this is a recorded and an archived live stream so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve on our work

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

And as far as video etiquette for live streams, mute if there's noise in your background, raise your hands so that we can hear from everybody on the queue, and we'll use respectful speech behavior.

As I stated, this is the last Active Inference live stream for 2020, but in 2021, it's already shaping up to be a great year.

We're going to be meeting Tuesdays from 7 to 9 a.m.

Pacific time, PST, or Pacific time when the time changes.

And you can go to this link to learn more.

When you go to that link, you'll see this spreadsheet.

and it has instructions on how you can participate, as well as which papers we'll be reading in which weeks.

So you can see that many authors will be joining us, and hopefully everybody will have the time to read and digest these papers.

Today in Active Inference Stream 11.2, we are going to have introductions and warmups, and then we'll go into the 11.2 itself.

We're gonna be continuing the discussion of Sophisticated Affective Inference, the paper of HESP et al.


UNKNOWN:
2020.


SPEAKER_00:
Welcome, Sasha.

We'll run through, again, the aims, claims, abstract, and roadmap, and the figures.

And happy New Year's, everyone.

Thanks a lot.

We'll do new stuff in 2021, and so stick along.

Let's get to the intros and warm-ups.

We will introduce ourself just by giving a short introduction or check-in and then passing to somebody who hasn't spoken yet.

So I'll start.

I'm Daniel and I will pass it first to a first-time visitor, Scott.


SPEAKER_08:
Hi, I'm Scott David.

I'm at the University of Washington Applied Physics Lab and I've been a lawyer for 27 years.

I'm trying to use physics principles to help structure social relationships and I will pass it to Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Hello, I'm Stephen, I'm based in Toronto.

I'm currently doing a practice-based PhD with Canterbury Christ Church University and I'm looking at applying the dynamic processes of active inference into my work with participatory theatre and community development and helping to understand the dynamics of all of that.

And I will pass it to Ivan.


SPEAKER_05:
Hello, my name is Ivan.

I am in Moscow, and I am a researcher in a system management school.

I'll pass it to Blue.


SPEAKER_03:
Hello, I'm Blue Knight.

I am an independent research consultant based out of New Mexico, and I will pass it to Sasha.


SPEAKER_02:
Hi, I'm Sasha.

I'm based out of Davis, California, and I study developmental neuroscience.

And I will pass it to Alex.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, my name is Alex.

I'm in Moscow, Russia.

I'm also a researcher in systems management school, and I'm trying to find the ways to connect active inference and systems engineering framework.


UNKNOWN:
Thanks.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

And Ryan, it seems like has the same situation as last week, but definitely for 2021, we'll figure it out.

I'll just tell them it still does not work.

All right, let's go to the warmup questions.

And again, if anyone else joins, we'll just roll with it.

So for these warmup questions,

Raise your hand, it'd be great to hear from everybody.

Let's just start off with what are some kinds of agents that we might want to model in active inference?

So just even before reading this paper or after reading the paper, what was the kind of system or type of agent that we might want to frame in this way of thinking?

So emotions makes us think about individual people, but there's other kinds of systems we might want to model as well.

Actually, Scott, you were mentioning some interesting types of agents we might be considering right before we started.

So maybe could you pick up there?

Sure.


SPEAKER_08:
I was mentioning in law, it feels like one of the things, one of the strategies is to introduce a provisional agent, a nominal party,

into an interaction so if you have two people interacting you can introduce a third by introducing the third it changes the system because now a three-party system with three-party concerns and that system then will have a different markov blanket as i am beginning to understand it and so in that context you may be able to do things you can't do in the other through the other markov blanket

because it may be able to, an example is in tax, there's a thing called the like kind exchange where I can exchange commercial property for another commercial property tax free.

Well, very often you can't find someone with exactly the property you're looking for.

Let's say you have a 20 acre farm, you want a 30 acre farm.

There's nobody around with a 30 acre farm.

You use an exchange facilitator and that means there's a third party in there.

They take possession of both properties and act like a mixing bowl.

And so putting the details of that aside, it essentially changes that system.

So it changes your Markov blankets.

And so one of the things I'm wondering about is the intentional shifting of the Markov blankets to increase solution space.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

So we have all kinds of agents who are going to be interacting and potentially by shifting the boundaries, the interfaces between agents and wrapping them or sub partitioning them, it's possible to make new kinds of swaps within existing infrastructures or new ones.

So anyone can just raise their hand.

I'll just put up the second question, which is another general one, which is how can we learn and communicate the technical aspects of active inference in an accessible fashion?

Stephen, go ahead.


SPEAKER_01:
I don't know if I'm gonna explain how to do this, but I'll explain the challenge which I think is important to overcome it because it's so valuable is I was just in a conversation and trying to talk about systems and how we think about systems when we engage in communities and thinking about how we understand the world.

And there's a lot of stuff in the world of kind of the social arts and participatory theater where it's like, we need to do something with the system

And then it flips to we're all a living system.

It's the body knows and we just know how it is.

We just need to listen to the body and it will know.

And it's both.

You know, we're in this dynamic niche of which there's an awful lot of stuff we don't know.

Yet we can tap into our experience.

and the way that our body works, and there's a way that we construct meaning in the world.

So I suppose trying to find a way to take case studies and show how it can help will be really useful.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

Sasha?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thanks, Stephen.

I really agree with what you said.

And ironically, or I guess in a very meta way, active inference is the answer to that question, because through closing the loop,

and introducing action into the system, we can better understand thinking about the system.

And so I think that's a really great point that case studies and really specific applications of active inference are going to be the best way to teach and learn about it.

So yeah, I think that's a great point.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of piggyback on that, I think, and maybe tie in some of what Scott was saying earlier, when we think about modeling in active inference, it's interesting to think about scaling this, not in the way that we talked about when we were talking about scaling active inference, but in the way that like we have several different systems, even just existing within the body.

like the input and output of the stomach and the spleen and the liver and also like the brain and the somatic awareness, to speak to kind of what Steven was saying earlier.

So it's interesting to try to think about modeling systems within systems in active inference.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And actually this brain and body dialogue and the multi-systems approach in the way that it doesn't say, well, everyone told you the brain was important.

Actually, it's the body.

No, it's actually, it's both.

And similarly, it's like quantitative and qualitative.

And so it's not just that we're going to throw out one for the other, but we want to think across that division and integrate them.

That's the beyond internalism and externalism and


SPEAKER_08:
integrating the sciences with the humanities and other things that we're kind of talking about scott i just put in the chat there was an article that came out december 4th in science magazine called the exploitative segregation of plant roots and so this is helps with that second question uh learn communicating it what it was talking about is the way that plant roots grow specifically you have two trees next to each other each is a system each has a markov blanket

They're growing next to each other and they differentiate their plant growth roots to optimize statistically their nutrient uptake.

And so they don't go and intrude on other plants roots space because that would not be optimized for them because they'd be putting more resources into growing further roots.

And but getting fewer nutrients because they'd be nearer the other plant.

And so to me, I looked at that and I went, wow, that's a real nice way to understand the dynamics of two different organisms interacting with statistical gradients there.

It's a nutritional gradient specifically that felt to me like it was a nice way to kind of introduce that idea of the of the contact between the two different systems.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool, so what I'm gonna take from this second question and all the answers to it is that through examples that are accessible and at hand, we can all start to learn more about the relational side of active inference and also the statistical and the quantitative because both those sides are gonna be learning journeys for everybody because no one's gonna know all the statistics, no one's gonna know all the deep relational pieces that are so familiar to performance artists and other areas.

The last question on the warmup is, what is something that you are wondering about or would like to have resolved by today's discussion?

So one thing I'm wondering about is, was raised right before we started as well is like, how do we think about emotion or this parameter in systems that aren't us?

And I'm also even wondering whether the emotions we experience are these parameters and how do we name parameters or talk about parameters of mathematical models in a way such that they're recognizable and capture meaning, but also don't constrain or sort of,

falsely limit what it means to be that term.

So we can get into a map territory issue when we're talking about computational models of emotion just like we could with consciousness.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of piggyback on what you were saying about emotions, like, I don't know, as I'm starting to study more about emotion, like I'm a logic and science kind of researcher.

And so, but learning about emotion, just reading personally, a lot of it seems to be like nonverbal.

Right.

And so how do you like quantify or even measure emotion on a scale when it's really like, you know, you're feeling some primitive thing from, you know, when you were left in your crib as a child that you have no words for because you didn't have words for it at that time.

And so how do you kind of like like impart some kind of meaning or quantitative scale on something that maybe there's not even language for?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, it's almost like the discredited but guiding three-part brain model.

So it's like the most prefrontal is the numbers and that level of formalization.

And then a little bit lower, we have language.

But then below that, the substrate is actually experience.

And that's the embodied experience that may or may not even have words to express it.

And then we can look at expressions like poetry or speech.

And is there a way to get more precise or is it merely an expression that's arising from an emotional state?

But the emotional state isn't a number.

It's not a words.

It's actually something that's more deep.

Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
I was wondering if with regard to dance and performance,

whether there are ways of communicating, because we talk about embodied, I wonder about encoding.

So can emotions be encoded in dance in a way that they can't be encoded in speech or other movement so that it becomes a surrogate or kind of that mirror neuron idea that you're projecting out an emotion by the projection of your body position, the morphology being the encoding of the emotion.


SPEAKER_00:
Cool question.

Yeah, Steven, definitely.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this also relates to this question of affect and dimensionality.

So maybe there's a way that when we take a perspective on things, we kind of look at a dimensional approach, but it can be encoded in some sort of spatial...

um affective way and maybe those dimensions aren't they they become like dimensions but the encoding is is not as linear as that a bit like color space when we see colors the the space of colors you can encode it in sort of in in lightness and two different types of color dimensions but the way that it's encoded is it when people look at perception it's not it's not linear in that space so maybe there's like an affect space

which somehow encodes in a way which is non-dimensional.


SPEAKER_08:
So might aesthetics be provisional efforts at encoding?


SPEAKER_00:
Very nice to bring in the aesthetics and the intuition because intuition is that which can't be expressed.

It's sort of like the dark matter.

It's the submerged part of the iceberg, but those reflect the deepest priors potentially that help us search through the state space that as we've been exploring,

is vast.

To do the exponential rollout of a chess game is going to be hard.

It's going to be more basically states than you can keep track of.

However, if you think, I feel good about this arrangement of the pieces, then with just a simple affect and a limited rollout, you may be able to do very well.

So again, Ryan, we're not sure, but we'll figure this one out.


SPEAKER_08:
okay uh let's is that just one other thing is that like the holographic principle potentially that on a system the information about the system is displayed on its surface is a markov blanket potentially that surface that you've observed to understand the system inside


SPEAKER_00:
I believe so.

And Chris Fields, who will be coming onto the stream, will be talking about a paper that's going to be in early March.

Chris has done a lot of holographic Markov blanket research.

So let's keep on thinking about that because that's very interesting.

I'm not exactly sure, but yeah, hopefully we'll figure that one out within a few months.

So the paper itself, and then again, we'll have enough time just to...

hear whatever people are thinking, but sophisticated affective inference, we talked about it in 11.0 and 11.1, and the paper is about combining these two previous threads of research, which were sophisticated active inference, which is sophisticated meaning deep through time, with affective inference or active inference where there's an emotional state component.

The abstract, they state that, and the roadmap of this relatively short paper is pretty short.

So today, let's think about how these two threads, which are distinct threads, that's why they each were their own paper, can be combined into something that is in front of us today, which is this paper that is literally summating these two threads of research.

And then we can think about a few directions that this research makes us think about.

whether developing more advanced simulations, so just asking which parameters of the simulation could be improved or how could this be expanded or generalized, but also on the more functional side, we can look to computational psychiatry, because we're talking about emotions, if we are, and also even non-human agents like robots.

So a few different directions we can go, and to structure that discussion,

it could be useful for us to have a few examples like two or three or four of sophisticated affective inference agents, conventional or unconventional.

So certainly one of them could be a person, but we'll think of that person being in a certain context.

And then we'll return to these examples that we come up with right now

As we go through the slides ahead, we'll just return it to example A, B, C. And then when we're talking about parameters, we'll be able to say, OK, so in the example A, this matrix would represent this.

In the example B, it would represent that.

So who has a thought or a suggestion on what would be a cool system to bring into this mixture?

So again, one of the examples will be a person.

And people can suggest what they think that person's story or situation should be, kind of like an improv scene.

And then also if people want to provide an unconventional system, that'd be good too.

So any thoughts on that?

Alex?


SPEAKER_04:
I think maybe we can consider the next system scale and see on team behavior.

Great.

So they try to define these concepts in the meaning of team communication inside and outside communication with different subsystem of organization.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks for suggesting that.

So let's do example A is going to be an individual human.

So that will be hopefully grounding us to our lived experience and to realistic situations that people and comic book characters find themselves in.

The second example B is going to be team communication.

So we'll kind of develop the story, but we'll see.

Maybe the team is a startup team, or maybe they're a research team, or maybe it's just an affinity group about some other topic.

And then the third example, let's think about something more organizational and institutional.

So let's think about that third example being potentially like a large company, large enough to have a legal department and an HR department, let's just say.

So we have three examples, which is going to be the person, the team, and the institution slash organization, three levels of analysis.

And then as we walk through these formalisms, let's see where it might be like strengths, weaknesses, limitations, insights, et cetera.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
And I suppose you could apply it to all of those.

This idea, you know, we have this vision and mission.

I mean, that's more for an organization.

The mission and the vision transfers down to a team, which might be the purpose and the roles.

And then you've got the kind of the character and the kind of,

you know, meaningfulness for the individual.

So you've got this temporal depth being sort of expressed across all of those levels of scale.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, exactly.

Like the examples in this case, they're not three disjoint examples.

In fact, the individual could be on a team in an organization.

So all three of these examples that we're going to be talking about could be nested within each other, or they could be disjoint.

so that really highlights why it's so important to have a multi-scale perspective because even when we're talking about the individual we're going to be thinking about the individual it's the system of interest it's what we're talking about it's the interface we're talking about the markov blanket that we're talking about but it's inherently embedded within a larger system so we're not going to forget the company when we're talking about the individual and vice versa

So it's always all the scales happening at once, but then depending on the system of interest or the Markov blanket or the level of coarse graining that is being performed in that specific analysis, it will dive into the details as they present themselves.

But that will be kind of fun.

So here's figure one in the paper, and we went a little bit in the previous videos into some of these subcomponents because this is like M4, and there's M123 as well that lead up to M4.

But just to recap what each of these pieces are, O at the bottom is observation,

and S is the state that inference is being done upon.

So this is where those examples come into play.

So in the individual case, the state that something might be having, that an individual might be performing inference on, it could be, is it sunny or cloudy outside?

And maybe that changes how you feel, or it could be a hidden state like, is this person happy with me or sad with me?

A is the mapping of how those hidden states relate to the observations.

So whether at the individual level it's sunny outside and then the observations are perceived with certain probability.

And then, yeah, people just raise their hand if they want to jump onto another example or ask a question about how some of these variables might interact.

I'll just walk through them with no example, and then we'll go to the example pieces.

B is how the states are inferred to change through time.

So the B is like the probability that given that at state one, it was in such and such a state that at the next time point, it would be at a different state.

Now, U is a piece that connects to B, and this is the policy.

And so the policy is something that influences how states are likely to transform into each other.

The policy itself is downstream of the agent's decisions about which actions to engage in.

It turns out that the way that the action selection is chosen at the level of analysis, whichever blanket that we're talking about,

that is uh action selection guided by this set of parameters the g is that expected free energy that's being minimized and that also covers up the c matrix which is like the preferences

The gamma is the precision or the uncertainty, whether it's like one over or not.

And basically this relates to how precise the agent believes they are in their estimate of which policies to be pursuing given this chain of things happening down here.

A is the, is the, okay, sorry about that.

at each time point in this model, because I want to be general, but I want to be specific about what this model actually did.

At each time point in this model, that's being captured by this top sort of pinkish area.

This is the affective inference question, where the affect of the agent is relating into how it simulates rolling out in this whole internal gray zone, all these future time points.

And then each model tick is going to be moving from the left to the right.

And at each time point in this model, the agent is going to be running out some possibilities for what could happen in the future.

So Steven, and then we'll think about the examples.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

So I was going to sort of bring an example there.

So maybe go ahead.

Yeah.

Well, one thing that's come up and I've been doing some work with this metaphors of movement and Andrew Austin, who does that work, he talks a lot about how anxiety, he finds anxiety is often related to people having, trying to have elevated status, like they're trying to have an elevated status and it's, and it makes a lot of sense for this because it could also be like,

you feel like you put yourself in an elevated status and you're always going to be slightly uncertain, unless maybe you're a king or someone, about that status being maintained.

So being put on a pedestal can be, so there could be something about Western society and status, which is partly why we have this overarching anxiety

because um and it would make sense in a way because there's always a sense of never being completely clear about whether your status is going to be maintained so i thought that's kind of interesting um and this would sort of tie would support that kind of observation


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So status or various other sort of social approval metrics we can think of, it's like the water we swim in as social organisms.

So just like a company might be wanting to stay above water financially, at least that department, a person has to be staying above water reputationally.

We can think of it in that way.

And so again, let's go to the examples and think about these different systems and what they might be performing inference on.

Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
Just going to comment on the status issue that it feels like.

Then you can adjust.

So you're making serial adjustments, right?

You're trying to minimize the free energy, minimize the difference between your expectation and the reality you're experiencing, as I understand it.

So with that overall effective status, you can do what feels like compensating controls, right?

So if you feel like you're at risk vis-a-vis the one presentation you're making of self,

you can rake in other presentations of self to compliment or supplement or mitigate the impression of one of them because you have myriad affective projections that you're making simultaneously.

So it feels like if you have an awareness of this, it can help you with that presentation of self question by understanding that you, okay, this affective status that I'm presenting,

is not getting me where I want to be inside.

So let me leverage another one, which is contiguous or a neighboring affectation.

I'll call it an affectation here, but I mean in a presentation of a Markov binding site.

So it feels like it gives a strategy for hybridizing and synthesizing your presentation of your Markov blankets.

Anyway, keep going.


SPEAKER_00:
I'm just, it's impressionable.

Yes.

Okay.

So let's go to the examples and think about how these three potentially even overlapping systems are going to be carrying this out.

And an individual at each time point, maybe let's just say this is every second or each minute.

a team might be interested in organizing on the multi-day and the organization is going to be more explicitly thinking, okay, quarter to quarter, that's going to be our next time that we're going to do all this simulation.

So it's not surprising that as things get bigger, they also get slower.

So that's a common theme we're going to see.

So the individual's affect is really where this emotional inspiration comes from.

So there, there's the closest mapping between affect and emotion.

But let's think about that team and the large company example.

Well, affect again, and valence specifically, is like that plus to minus axis.

So is this team going well?

Is this company going well?

And if someone says, yeah, we're burning money at an incredible rate, it's unsustainable, but it's going well because I have a...

believed trajectory that we're going to go on where we actually pull out of the nosedive and do X, Y, Z. So they can still think it's going perfectly well, even if the instantaneous rate of loss is high.

And then on the flip side, you can imagine a team or a large company where instantaneously their state looks like it's good.

It looks like they have a lot of cash, or it looks like they have a lot of people involved in the team.

but they still feel negative about it.

So that disjoint between the affect about a situation and the state of the situation is one thing to take into account.

Now let's connect the affect at all these levels to precision estimates at different levels.

Especially in the active inference framework, which frames what organisms or any system is doing as precision seeking,

high anxiety is going to be coming from having low precision.

Now, it's not that we want zero uncertainty.

We want to have this controlled novelty sort of U curve, but it can be clearly situations where your precision is too low and then you're surprised by what is being admitted to you in the niche, whether it's your team operating environment or the company's operating environment.

And then if your precision

It can't get too high because if you're overly precise and you're incorrect, then you're going to die.

Like if you have a super, super accurate understanding, but you're just delusional, then you're going to fall off the cliff.

So in a way, what shapes this precision is actually the real world, which prunes beliefs that are not functionally associated with success in the real world.

Steven, and then we'll come back to it.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I really like this idea of thinking about how we understand ourselves within all of this.

So for instance, yeah, if you could move between a different regime of attention or sense of self, which could be like what happens

do sense making maybe even change the operating metaphors of the person you know who am i at the moment you know what's the context what's my um situational um attunement what's my team's purpose what's what's the operating metaphor for this team are we like all driving together in a car or we are we building ourselves a fortress you know and that would that almost could give a way to jump in and out of

these kind of affective engines, if that makes sense.

So as you're seeing over time, how's it going?

What's the policy and what's the affective states that are sort of thought about in a certain future?

And they could almost then say, okay, what if I shifted, maybe that's where you'd need the body, like the metaphor I'm working with.

And then what does that do?

And, um, and maybe at times that's when you need to work with a group to be able to do that because maybe an individual can't just keep flipping backwards and forwards.

You need to work as a group to do that kind of sense making across different times.


SPEAKER_08:
Cool.

Scott.

I had a question for Sasha.

You were mentioning pruning, but you weren't talking about dendritic pruning, but I wonder if dendritic pruning is

describable by what the type of pruning you were just talking about because my understanding of dendritic pruning very minimal is that you know during the day you have the growth of dendrites and then this prune back selectively and that that is influenced by your externality each day the growth is influenced by your externality and then there's this pruning process that feels like it's iterating itself at that at that level is that describable by this here is that another scale or is it something else that's going on there


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I think that's a really interesting analogy.

That's kind of what's happening there.

I don't know if I would kind of draw all the same parallels just from a mechanistic standpoint, but it's true that kind of in the generalities that as connections are formed during the day, then

They're pruned or lost as they're not used.

And yet we think that happens at night.

But yet I think that's an interesting analogy to draw that it's beliefs about the world that aren't, I don't know, useful or supported are the ones that then get pruned.

Yes.

Oh, I was also going to say the other aspect is I think we know from our lived experience is that it's really interesting when people can be holding certain beliefs and not...

not know that.

And then when they finally kind of confront the belief, there's a bit of a breakdown.

And to me, that moment is very interesting when people have to confront certain beliefs that maybe they didn't even recognize that they held.


SPEAKER_00:
So there's a phase change and a recontextualization piece in the last part you said, Sasha, and the pruning is using a network analogy.

So it's like pruning connections between different aspects of the system.

And so let's think about the individual in the office having a conversation with somebody.

The query, the prompt to them, let's just say is, how are you feeling?

And that is a query that's presented to the interface, which is their ears.

and also their vision and other aspects, the query is presented to the interface about what's inside of the interface.

And now what's happening inside of the interface is a generative model of that query presenting system.

So inside of the person, there's a generative model of, for example, the person who's talking to them asking that question.

And we know it's a generative model because if they covered up their eyes or if they only heard part of it, they might be able to still

recover what was being asked but in either case there's a generative model inside of the interface and a prompt is being presented as an observation stimuli to the interface that's querying how the system will respond so speech is action and that's not even a legal claim it's that it's a motor claim speech is generated by a motor behavior it's not your hand but it is a motor behavior and for some people it is with their hand so various body parts can be used to communicate

Let's think about that interface in the process of the team and the company.

So potentially for these organizational entities, the interface could be like a consultant who interfaces with specific questions, but instead of a counselor who asks, how are you feeling to an individual, there might be questions that could be asked to the team.

and there can be questions that could be asked such that only the team could respond and someone might say well how could you ask a question that only a team could respond to aren't teams composed of people there's two things i'd say there the first is that that's the reductionist argument the reductionist slide is like what do you mean get a response from a person aren't you just going to get a response from skin cells and neurons it's like

right that's what i'm trying to get that response so even if the response can be reductionistically understood as being composed of smaller pieces that's not a surprise that should be taken for default so questions can be asked to teams that of course humans are going to be responding uh to as well but also we can think about kind of like colony phenotypes we can think about team phenotypes so for example let's just say i ask a question to a team

like uh what did you have for lunch or what do you think the most exciting project is for next year and then i looked at the distribution of how long it took people to respond to that message that's like a colony level trait it's a collective trait that distribution is composed of people acting but no individual can dictate what that distributional parameter is

So it's like a measurement of, let's just say, some blood cells.

You flow a million blood cells through, and then you can get a distribution across all of those blood cells.

So it's like you're querying in the aggregate, even though each individual sub piece could have been following that distribution or somewhat of an outlier.

So those are the kinds of things that you could ask

presenting to a team or an organization.

And the team or the organization is gonna have a generative model of its niche.

So if it's involved in a certain type of consultancy where it paid a lot of money and it really respects what the person is gonna be doing, then maybe when you ask them the question, what's the most exciting project and why, they give one response.

Or what's the most challenging project of this year and why was it challenging?

Whereas if you were in a different context, you'd give a different response because the generative model of the system

across that interface is very different so the response that it gives will be different and it's going to be querying different things and externalizing different aspects of itself could be accurate could be inaccurate scott so one of the things that raises is i've been in some of the work that i've done in cyber security i've been parsing principles versus ethics versus norms


SPEAKER_08:
And so it's kind of interesting in querying a group, they're going to get an average, right?

You'll get a Gaussian distribution or whatever of opinion and then it'll be informative.

And so norms, I assert for these purposes that their behaviors, behavioral expectations that are set through the past, what was normal.

And one of the assertions I make is principles.

And again, they're assertions.

There's different overlap here.

The principles are institutional assertions of aspiration.

And ethics also are aspirational, but they're human assertions about human behaviors.

That's the distinction I make, whatever words you want to use.

And so it's interesting in the context of what you're talking about, about querying a group.

Because there's different evidentiary chunks that you'll look at, right?

Normative, you'll be looking, according to those definitions, on, hey, what did we do before?

And what did we do against the set of standards that's set?

The principles may be more aspirational, and it may be, you know, how are we doing towards that thing?

But it's not necessarily based on what was done before.

You can say our principles are more aspirational than what we did before.

So it's interesting just that interface of what's used in the discussion of the group dynamics and how that relates to what you were just describing, which is the querying of the group and individuals.

The framing of the nature of that output you're getting from the group is kind of interesting based on that question asked.

What do you do before is one question.

What do you wish to do in the future is a different question.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

So that query could be, what do you regularly do?

So again, it could be the person in the office and someone says, what is your morning routine?

That's something we talked about in a previous week.

Or it could be a query to a team.

What is your onboarding routine?

Or how do you welcome new members?

And then this question of the aspirational and the norms.

So it's funny because norms can mean what's normal.

It means what's expected.

That's what has happened in the past because what's not normal, if not the past, what's normal?

But at the same time, normative means

means what should be.

So a normative claim should be like, I think people should be treated this way.

And that may or may not reflect what has been the norm.

So people, all of belief systems make normative claims that sometimes are consistent with norms

and sometimes are almost radically divergent from norms.

Someone says, the norm is A, but I think the norm should be B. So I'm making a normative claim about the norms, and it should be different.

And so these are all interesting things to, yeah, Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
SCOTT J. So one big gap that's out there in the world right now is the gap between law and the interactions that technology allows.

And I'm talking about practically up and down the chain.

reproductive interactions, biomedical, population-wide, all these different things, the law is really lagging, okay?

So one of the things that's interesting about this is there a possibility that this kind of analysis can help us to discover norms that would guide

groups and those norms, if they're sufficiently interesting to the groups, can be made enforceable into laws.

And so that to me, this is a very interesting way of possibility of discovery of new laws and self-constraints that groups can put on themselves in order to function as larger systems in the globe kind of context.

But I'll put that aside for now.

But I just wanted to raise that.

Is this a discovery?

Is this a mechanism for discovery of new working models of larger scale norms?


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think that this is a good point because

And discovering that with this model here where you've got this task specific and then you've got this effective, actually as a larger sort of scale, time scale sort of checking, I think it's also relevant in terms of how we can get mechanized in our, like if we just keep doing the same task and we get the reward in the queue and it starts to,

create a high sense of this false sense of certainty in our world which is so much about just constructing more of our social niche and and alienating or externalizing the environmental so we we can start to get caught up in this kind of task specific ways of working and silos and so that maybe there's this this could speak to why we need to do some sort of sense breaking


SPEAKER_00:
to sort of take us out of some of these mechanizations and look at a longer time scale and use affect to do that integration and not just rely on metrics cool let's let's take scott's point about this being not just an enforcement understanding but a discovery process and connect that to some topics we've been considering like bottom up versus top down function of systems so the bottom up

is learning that's where the little ants are going out and they're finding different things or each of the cells in the retina is receiving a different photon or each person is receiving a different news feed and then as it goes quote up or in the system it's being aggregated and that is updating progressively more and more summary like variables like of teams or of organizations and then

Norms can feed back down to lower levels of the system, whether in the brain, like the Bayesian brain or the predictive processing hypothesis, or whether it's team communication norms.

And those can be informal or formal.

When we are talking about human organizations, we gain this level of syntactic framing of top-down priors.

So instead of just saying, this is how things are, like the red blood cells are flowing at this speed, so that's the speed they're flowing at, we're gonna say there's a speed limit.

And if you don't follow the speed limit, then we're gonna have this type of enforcement mechanism.

And so it could be the case that in the legal context,

that if you just apply a law, a top-down law, it's kind of like trying to teach someone a motor pattern.

Let's just say a speech law of some type of controlling speech.

It's like controlling someone's motor behavior, again, because it is a motor behavior.

And so what would you do?

Would you put them in the exoskeleton and say, okay, here's a perfect golf swing.

Now you're a golfer, right?

Well, no, you actually need to practice and you need to have feedback.

And so if the law is overly punitive and it says, oh, that one time that you got put in the exoskeleton, you didn't understand how to golf and other sports that golfers know, how could you not have made the connection there from that one time that I punished you for messing up?

That is not an extremely helpful framework for certain issues.

So how could we have this bi-directional conversation where there's experimentation and implementation at the edges

And then people's experience percolates upwards in the system.

And then the system informally, but eventually formally ends up entrenching healthy or productive or agreed upon patterns.

So it's an interesting thought about how these type of systems are not just about learning.

They're not just about exploitation.

As we've been thinking about, they're sort of in both domains and they can trade off.

And when they need to exploit, they can dip into exploitative type behavior, but also they can be in an exploratory mode.

Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
and it's also so much wrapped up in identity it's amazing how this is a new platform for identity because every thing has a markov blanket and it has attributes and external attributes that are presented and so the discovery when you have things like trade associations markets communities of interest where things

entities with similar um i guess markov blankets and attributes can cluster together forming those systems which have larger scale which enable de-risking and leverage for the organism or organization at larger levels so the discovery process of bringing these markets are where markov blankets are um made similar

Because you go in and there's a law that says if you go in, it's a flea market.

Your table can only be five by five.

So if you go in with a seven by five table, you can't go to that flea market.

You have to follow the rules to be part of the club.

But if you're in the club, you get the power of having more people walking past your table to sell stuff.


SPEAKER_00:
So there's the interface, the law for the vendor to the flea market.

And then within that transaction, there's a sub transaction, which is if you want this little pocket knife, you're going to give me $3 and then I'll give you the pocket knife.

So these are the nesting of agreements in the context of identity and enforced and unenforced norms.

Blue and then Steven.


SPEAKER_03:
So just to kind of tie into what both you and Scott were saying.

So like, you know, if we're ants and we're going through the world, like building this generative model, like as we discover, as we're learning, right?

Like, so as we learn, we build the generative model.

Like to what extent is our generative model tied into our identity?

Like that's interesting.

it's curious to think about.

And, and I mean, I know that like there's a policy update and perhaps the policy is more based on identity.

Like we talked about earlier, like the running every day, uh, maybe it's, it's a policy thing that's identity.

And so the, the, we pick the, the policy that, that then minimizes the free energy.

But, but I just wonder like, you know, the, the generative model, how frequently that, that builds upon the identity, like what the relationship is between those two.


SPEAKER_00:
Okay.

And then Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

Well, one thing that sort of ties into that question of identity and this type of model is, and the Markov blanket, I suppose, is how much changes

based on the processing, which could be like this in the brain, could be sort of structured through the way the brain is structured.

So there could be an additional type of structuring going on in which all of this is able to work together.

and then so how much is is this kind of um the observations and the states in the sort of brain computating in relation and with the body and how much is it just literally the way the mark of blanket itself

is changed you know so and i think that's maybe an open question at the moment because there's the the question i don't think as much is that the idea of regimes of attention has been talked about but literally how would that change your computation by bringing in different parts of the body and the relation to the environment as the sort of mark of blanket to integrate information coming in and how much is through computation and i sense that

that at certain times, maybe when you're learning something for the first time, it's very computationally heavy, but then as you draw things down and it becomes kind of tacit knowledge, we might become subconsciously able to flow and shift


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, formal systems can become integrated through muscle memory.

So somebody who's learning how to play violin, they don't need to know the math of the frequency overlap.

They might learn that in their journey, but also it becomes incorporated through culturally acquired practices and muscle memory.

And that can be carried out into other areas.

Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
There was an article just read recently in Nature or Science, which relates to Stephen's last point.

And it was about how in cultures where there were deaf cultures, so there are isolated populations.

I think there was one in Central America.

There was one in the Middle East of deaf people because there was some kind of genetic thing.

And so large populations of isolated people who were deaf.

And what they found is when they came up with their independent sign languages, they were all independently generated.

What they found in this research is they used the body in each of the isolated populations.

The body was used in the same way.

I'm going to make up the parts because I can't remember them, but they would first use the face parts, then they would use the left arm, then they would use the right arm, then they would use the core of the body, the morphology of speech through sign language.

was identical across the human populations, even though they were isolated from each other in terms of what they added on.

I forget what it was with the bigger concepts or the things that were emotional.

There were different morphologies of that situating their expression.

in their morphology, in other parts of their morphology.

So I thought it would relate to that.

I'm not sure how, but it feels like that form of expression being uniform across humans.

It's like the theories of humans having a language capacity.

I forget who that is, maybe McLuhan or somebody.

Anyway, but it's interesting that the morphology of the body

It sounds like there's some intrinsic tiering of what expression comes through what parts of the body.

I'll try to find the article.


SPEAKER_00:
Very interesting, and that actually reminds me of William Blake's poetry and the fourfold Albion, which is a metaphor for cosmic persona, as well as all of England, as well as the individual body.

and so it's a metaphor that he returns to many times in an allegorical context and it's so evocative because it speaks to a multi-scale system and it is of course applying to multi multi-scale systems steven yeah thanks for that uh scott because i think that's i mean that could actually also you know we there's all this thing about this innate language capacity which has now been kind of discounted but


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, if actions first and then morphology is maybe more related, certainly within certain environmental niches that people have grown up in, that would maybe explain why there was that confusion in the language world.

because people sort of saw language as universal.

Well, actually, if the morphology is where it's at, and language is just another type of morphology that's kind of building on the core morphology of the body, that's where that patterning was coming from, not the language itself or the language in process.


SPEAKER_08:
Look, I was just going to say, extending that out further, one of the assertions that I've started to

make and believe is that the mind doesn't reside in the brain at all.

The mind resides in language and in material culture, and the brain is an antenna that we tune into the local mind wherever we're exposed to.

That's why colonialists put indigenous populations' children in their schools, right?

They want to tune their mind into a colonialist culture early, because then it renders the externality innocuous for their colonialism.

Anyway.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes, that's true of all children's education, including contemporary.

And to bring in this key point of precision, again, active inference is not about systems finding the most rewarding state and then sticking with it.

It's about precision.

So to connect that to identity,

The child's education is basically being given symbols that will help it navigate the regularities in its niche.

And again, there can be dysfunctional education that leads to children that are incapable of taking advantage or of working with the regularities in the niche.

but this is where the policy selection piece comes into play to kind of return it to the figure because that's like important to return to what the paper said is the policy selection piece is so tied up with identity.

It's not that there's an identity like who we are and then there's this totally separate question of what we do.

It actually is we are how we act

And to even take it to another level, the understanding of how the world changes, S, the states that are external that we care about, the understanding of how those states change is related to the policy actions that the system takes.

And so that even brings this relational mode another level deeper.

It's not just like Sapir-Whorf.

Oh, well, the words that you use change how you think or they influence how you think.

Everything is influential on how we think because how we think is like this emergent outcome from all those factors.

So it's a starting point to say that the words that we have or the affordances or the sensory capacities that we have shape our understanding of the niche.

That's the starting point.

Blue?


SPEAKER_03:
So just to piggyback on the idea of a team and identity, like how, and also where the mind is, like where is the mind of a team, right?

Like when you're thinking about this in terms of active inference.

And so the individual team members, I mean, we've all worked on teams before at various points and it's amazing how

the team changes based on the function of its individual components, right?

So there are different people that bring different dynamics to a team.

Some people may be louder, stronger, or less influential, or everyone has their different kind of role in a team.

And these all really bring changes to the overall structure and the way that the team will react, right?

Like based on a query, like when you query a team, what is the best project of the year?

That'll change based on the individual components of that team.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And the team organism mapping, let's think about team onboarding and the way that the interface of the organism is like an interface of a team.

So the immune system of a person, there's times where something is onboarded, but in a very controlled way, and it does not trigger the immune system.

So, for example, if you eat something in the stomach, which is a specialized chamber that digests food, it is then absorbed through the interface of the gut in a controllable way, in a way where only the safe pieces, like you know that the sugars are coming in and the amino acids are coming in, lipids are coming in.

So through that controlled and evolutionarily selected upon interface, there is an onboarding process that's healthy.

But if there's a onboarding event on your body, like a cut in your skin, it's going to trigger the immune system.

So that's more like a security breach for a team.

Whereas eating for a team might be like, hey, we're gonna get this ingest of new data.

Our colleague is gonna send us a dataset.

It's gonna come from this email address and it's this type.

If it's from a different email address, I'm not gonna see it.

Or if it's of a different type, we're gonna need to change our pipeline.

But if it's this type of food coming at this interface and it's this structure,

We're going to be able to digest that and then use the information latent in that input to help our team become more structured or to expand, just like an organism would break down a food and use it to grow itself or to operate.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
And also with teams, you've got the...

the teleology of the team like the purpose the goals and i think that that i mean this figure sort of speaking a lot to task based you know ways of of things being evaluated with rewards and the way that we structure our teams often with

the way that we then construct the environment to sort of lead us towards those rewards in a way and i'm really interested i've been looking at this thing called infusion space that i've been working on is when we are in a kind of an organized space with a teleology and a direction like a team and organization and then when we're in a sort of community uh space where

which maybe this isn't you know i think is another process of affect where we're sort of attuning to um that kind of intersubjective dynamic between us and you know there's there's one's more efficient the team's more efficient if your goal is the right goal the danger is that you could be they talk about now with the modern world is we're getting very good at doing the wrong things so it can be the trap you fall into so climate change being a classic case we're very good doing things we shouldn't be doing

um so i think there's an interesting question there about a teleological dynamic aligned to goals and rewards which everything's then and it could actually remove the knowing of your affect and you can just ignore it because you're getting other kicks and when the deeper knowing is like you know it's not really going to be good when you talk about really long time scales


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, let's expand on that.

So teleology is coming from the word teleos, which is the end.

So teleology is the study in philosophy of what systems are as defined by their ends.

So the purpose of something, like houses are to keep people warm and what are people for?

But instead of engaging in the philosophy of teleology, like what is it mean to be a human?

What are we here for?

We can think about it from a cybernetics perspective, which is also equivalent to like an intentional stance in philosophy.

And that's kind of like saying like, okay, look, whether or not we're ever gonna figure out the ultimate teleos of a human or the ultimate teleos of our team,

At the very least, as a goal-seeking system that has to operate amidst uncertainty and communicate through limited and noisy channels, we need to have clarity on our mission, our local teleos,

so that we can have clarity on action.

And again, if your local mission is something that is a pursuable, then it's a second layer, whether it's quote good or bad.

And that's the whole question about what Scott raised with the Markov blankets of legal entities.

And there it's kind of easy to see some of the analogies between let's say a society and a person.

If each cell were to fight for its Markov blanket, then things could get hairy pretty fast.

Whereas over evolutionary time, the interfaces between cells of the organism have evolved through so many different proteins and so many different mechanisms to work well together, to be compatible within the organism.

And similarly, within a healthy operating system for legal entities, you could imagine there would be healthy interfaces.

But in the absence of a healthy interface, then even entities whose interests are completely aligned might end up in extremely adversarial contexts together.

Scott?


SPEAKER_08:
And I think that might be the problem with Kant's, Immanuel Kant's, what is it called?

The something imperative?

Categorical imperative.

Yes.

And is that the notion that if a human acts, a good human acts in a good way, it'll be good for society?


SPEAKER_00:
So the Kantian imperative, as it's called, a categorical imperative sometimes, I just wanted to look up an exact word.

It is quoted as a rule of conduct that is unconditional or absolute for all agents, the validity of claim of which does not depend on any desire or end.

That reads heavily as that classic era of abstraction in philosophy.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_08:
And that's one of the problems in European law right now and an identity law like GDPR and those kind of things in the real world.

Their idea of entities and of identity is based on Hegel and Kant.

And those are there.

There is a real focus on that individual being good and that being enough to have the entire society work well.

And I think that's part of the challenges over there.

In continental law, you make the law and you refer back to the statute all the time.

In common law, which is any place that was part of the British Empire, what you do is you come up with a half-assed version of the law and then you allow common law to fix it up.

So the common law acts as a continually dynamic revisiting.

because the courts then make the law.

And then when you have a later case, you don't just look at the original statute, you look at the cases as well, the other court cases.

And so it's been modified by that.

So one of the things that this gets tangled up in is philosophically,

a question of how much of a teleology you have.

I believe, my personal belief is that because they had royalty, a tradition of royalty on the European continent, that they're more amenable to a single voice.

And so that single voice can act in a misdirected way for a longer period of time because it projects onto a paradigm, onto the population.

But it's just something that, it gets softer at that level perhaps because we don't know the data and the metrics, but it feels like those same kind of

Things are iterating from a system perspective.

If you have something that's too stuck in the mud, it's not going to change as fast.

And now that's happening everywhere since technology, Moore's law increases interactions exponentially.

All of our institutions, all of them were intended to de-risk and leverage much more leisurely institutional contexts.

So they're no longer fit for function in the interaction landscapes we have.

And so one of the questions is, in what way might this analysis help us to not just improve old institutions, that might not be possible, but construct institutions that can better be dynamic with the increased frequency and volume of interactions we have, which is perceived by any one institution as an increase in density.

interaction density that's why your calendar is all jammed up because we're still using calendars the way we used to use them which is linear progression of things you have to do things like that so anyway sorry about the question there yeah interesting steven


SPEAKER_01:
Well, that also might tie into this idea of when we have systems in our niche that we've created, when do we need them to be more tunable to our own active inference types of dynamics?

Like if this is the type of way that we can, what would help us

be better at attuning and what types of attention at what types of scale would we want this kind of dynamical process and when does it want to be fixed and it kind of speaks another problem in the development world was the rights-based approach to development so someone somewhere defines what people's rights are

and then it gets dictated down but that causes a lot of problems when you roll out into cultures which value things slightly different to those that decided what's right and it's also what's right for someone in a poor context or a poverty context might not be quite as it is with someone in a developed wealthy context so the same you know maybe this is a question that needs to be asked is when do we need to have

this kind of active inference ergodic help you know thought about create and when do we say look this isn't being done that way we're just going to bolt it down and use a non-ergodic kind of structured state of the sort of laws


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, interesting.

So let's try to connect that to Kant and then back to action, because that's the key piece.

And that's what we really want to emphasize with the active inference approach is that although we generalize, we're generalizing to reduce our uncertainty about observations, which could be letters or sounds that we're hearing, we're reducing our uncertainty about these stimuli that we're as people receiving.

by generalizing so that we can guide action.

And so the categorical imperative on Wikipedia, it says it's best known from its first formulation, act only according to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law.

So that's actually also related in a sense like a symmetry relationship with the Rawlsian theories of justice.

Like what would be fair would be if you were to be a random draw, you'd want to be in that society versus another society.

But here's where active inference and action and the reality of the finite world come into play.

Different people have different risk preference trade-offs.

So maybe somebody says, yeah, I'll take a one in a million chance of being the dictator.

And somebody else says, no, I'd rather have an 100% chance of being in this other world where everyone has the exact same amount of official power, for example.

But even at a deeper level, that's a thought discussion and it's becoming increasingly lifted from action and from policy selections that we as the agents perceiving that question are being faced with.

And so when people bring in the things like it should become a universal law, that's a normative claim about a universalism about a law

and who's the judge, jury, executioner.

So although the sentence, the imperative started with act according to dot, dot, dot, dot, it ended up in the clouds with some speculation about what could or would or should become universal and ostensibly enforced by other people with weapons, but not yourself.

So how do we tie it back to the real system?

and confront ourselves with what we actually are being faced with from an affordance and from a challenges perspective and then ask what policies will help guide the whole system towards states that we want to see but at first we can just acquire precision about who are we what are our relationships what are our interfaces how can we think in a more rigorous multi-scale way

about how we are composed of our relationships.

So not that I'm some Adam and I'm being influenced by my relationships, but it's multi-scale relationships all the way up and down.

So what is really happening here?

These are some interesting ways that sidestep

morality when working together but they sidestep the ways that morality has been framed in terms of well i think it should become a universal law that i should get all the money and then it's easy for me to act within the categorical imperative under that understanding and someone says well no that's not the real understanding and then you're right back to square zero so how are we going to use

systems thinking but also include aspects of intercultural communication and understanding that people are going to be having different experiences of the same deal the same interface different people are going to have different experiences of it and then work within that environment so that's kind of you know some big areas that hopefully we'll be thinking about in the coming years because they're uh serious questions about how to interface formal systems with people scott


SPEAKER_08:
One of the things that's interesting right now in law is that, you know, it's really showing wear and tear.

And people are really focusing on liability and rights and things like that, which is terrific.

But one of the things, the right is an expectation.

And what the law does is it constructs a bunch of duties around that right that give life to the right.

So if I say I have a right to free speech and nobody has a duty to respect it, then I don't have anything except words on paper.

so the duties the construction of duties what that does is it's constraint on other uh expression other markov blankets right you're limiting and constraining the environment of other individuals you'll meet because they have a duty to do x the duty to there's a judge who said years ago in the united states you're right to swing your head arm in public ends where my nose begins

So you can keep doing this until my nose is next to where you're swinging your arm.

So it's interesting, isn't it, that you have this.

That is really that dynamic element.

If a nose is introduced into that system, you've got to stop swinging your arm.

And so the anticipation of situations where you shouldn't swing your arm, don't swing your arm in an elevator.

You know, that kind of thing.

Right.

Don't don't spit on the subway.

But you start to have these rules which are like, hey, we can generalize that duty to a population.

And if it's relatively innocuous, like red means stop.

Purple could mean stop.

It's not the light that stops the car.

It's the behavior elicited by the signal.

So there are a lot of innocuous things we can avoid avoidable harms by agreeing on innocuous signaling for certain duties and behaviors that would render those rights to be realized and to be living.


SPEAKER_00:
yep so with this kind of eating team metaphor ingestion of stimuli or a food at the organism level and that's being processed either chemically with food or informationally with the stimuli in order to guide action so we can think about these teams and organizations as getting inputs and then engaging in action in their niche and the goal of the inputs and selection is going to shape this

is so that the inputs can be processed in a way that leads to outputs that are effective.

And so again, another mapping would be to a heat system.

So like an engine, if you can convert 100% of the potential energy into work, it's a very efficient system and it doesn't lose a lot to heat.

Whereas if you have a system that's broken or has inefficiencies in it, it will perform very little work in its task specific role.

and it will release a lot as heat, which is like wasted energy.

That's like data exhaust.

There's wasted data.

There's so many mappings here.

Actually, in the last couple of minutes, let's just run through the slides, see if anything comes to mind.

But other than that, I'm sure we could keep on thinking about this.

Figure two of the paper.

the authors showed this rollout game and the agent at each time point is imagining what could happen on future timelines.

And so here's a timeline where I stay in this neutral state on the left side.

Here's a timeline where I get to state three and that's good.

And then I go to state four and it's bad.

And so as you simulate and you roll out more and more and more deeply, that's the sophisticated or the deep component.

As you roll that out,

in order to track what kind of a world you're in.

Are you in a world where all the routes are bad or all of them are good or some are good and some are bad?

The agent is tracking a few things.

It's tracking the state estimates, like the expected value of different policy choices, but also the variance or the uncertainty.

And what we saw in this paper was that as the agent starts initially thinking and simulating deeply, it starts to be perceiving itself in states that are rewarding

and it has relatively high precision about being able to maintain itself in those states.

But as it continues to simulate deeper and deeper, the precision of its model drops.

This is associated with anxiety from the computational psychiatry perspective.

and uh it's also associated with the increased percentage of the events being negative but not a 10x increase in the events being negative and as we pointed out last time it's actually when the threat perception is at a medium level when the anxiety skyrockets and again this specific trace is just related to the parameters of this model so it's not meant to be a general claim about anxiety or something like that it is for future work to really map this onto real world systems

We had the formalisms, which people can pause and look at.

The formalisms of sophisticated inference and the real natural language translations of some of these variables that are interacting in these papers.

talked about the generalized free energy and about how that formalism has a few different parts one of those parts is conditioned on policies and it talks about the relational mapping between observations and states and then the other function here is conditioned on policy and it's uh yeah

Sorry, let me just rephrase that.

One of these sides is conditioned on policy and relates to states.

The other side is conditioned on observations and states, and it relates to policy selection.

We talked about a few other topics, intrinsic and external value, general and special cases, and how when you are moving through a prediction in this branching way, there's an exponentially increasing number of states.

And so in order to deal with that,

organisms or systems have to engage in a little bit more of a guided kind of search and that brings us to this slide which is what i kind of wanted to pause on because i think blue this is what made you say we have to invite scott so what was interesting to you here what made you think of that


SPEAKER_03:
Just Scott and how Scott's always presenting on risk.

And this just was like, well, I think that Scott really needs to be here.

And based on also the fact that Scott said he'd been studying active inference since the October complexity weekend.

So those two things kind of.


SPEAKER_08:
nailed it for me it's i feel like it's a it's it's this giant thing smorgasbord that's in the next room that i haven't yet entered into that's it's it's so delightful i'm so thrilled by my ignorance in this this is the best


SPEAKER_00:
gift i could ever get so thank you all you know it's like a room to room party you just go room to room and it's always a new setting but we're bringing the party along because it's enacted it's not that there's a room of researchers or a community that's waiting for us to be onboarded onto we're

co-domesticating each other and creating the community that we want to see.

So that's self-organization and multi-scale organization in action.

And we can think about that actually tying it back to this figure.

So the active inference framework under special cases, which were described in this slide,

can think about a few different cases where certain things are driven to zero so when there's no uncertainty about states in other words states of the world can be perfectly known then risk sensitive policies can be enacted

So when there's no ambiguity about states, you can talk about risk.

That's this part right here.

However, when there is ambiguity about states, you have to reduce that uncertainty.

And that's sort of like, if you don't know what the states of the system are, you can't operate.

But to the extent you have reduced ambiguity about the observations in the States, you're able to increasingly plan risk sensitive policy.

So Scott, that makes me think about in a world of digital transactions where we can have reduced uncertainty about certain types of events happening, could we then move some of that energy and focus to risk aware policy?

So that's one piece here.

That's why I call what we have right now a self-boiling ocean.

Nice.

So that's the saddle meme.

This is still within the context of how most people think about ambiguity and uncertainty, VUCA.

That's in the terms of minimization of two different things.

Minimize uncertainty, minimize risk.

First, go ahead and reduce your uncertainty about the states.

And then to whatever extent you can do that, reduce our uncertainty about the future vis-a-vis reducing risk.

That's the normal framework.

for most people, or at least it's one way to think about it.

But now let's think about it, active inference, not just in a risk control way, but in this Bayesian statistical framework, a variational framework where we're actually doing not just a double minimization, but we're doing like a push pull with minimization and an exploration simultaneously.

So we're gonna be able to dynamically adjust explore, exploit.

It's not exactly explore, exploit as we talked about, but it's like explore, exploit because we can dynamically adjust the relative pressure or weighting of the in and the out.

So we're always exploring and we're also always reducing our uncertainty

about the system.

And so that's why the two arrows are moved into an overlapping area, just graphically.

This is just a loose graphical model here because it's not a disjoint two-step process, ambiguity about states, and then ambiguity about risk if we have certainty about states.

This is the co-joint estimation of

all these pieces together in a way that's a push-pull.

So there's a couple paradigm-changing ways of framing risk and operating in this mode.


SPEAKER_08:
And that will, it'll lead to different types of institutional structures that'll be distributed, which will resemble neighborhood watch.

But it won't just be neighborhood watch, it'll be neighborhood creation as well.

That's a fundamental change.


SPEAKER_00:
Exactly.

Instead of just putting up the law and like a trip wire and then triggering it, you could say, how do we just have people who are going on a neighborhood walk, just people walking the neighborhood?

It's like, you know, like they could just having fun and being social.

Could that be the actual thing?

And so it fuses several of the previous ways of thinking about it.

Well, we're going to reduce our uncertainty about what's happening in the neighborhood.

And then we're going to do a risk minimization policy.

Well, this makes you think about installing surveillance cameras.

But what if you said we're going to jointly be discovering what community norms we have and what we want to be aspirationally as a neighborhood around safety or around communication.

And maybe there's a way where we can just go on walks in the afternoon and all of a sudden people are connecting and it's a safer world.


SPEAKER_08:
And the other just one other thing I once read an article about the world champion fly tie tire and he tied flies and they were the most successful flies for catching fish.

But all the people complain that his flies didn't look like actual insects.

They didn't fool humans.

And he said, I don't have to fool the humans.

I just have to fool the fish.

And so the reason I say that here is the way we're going to do this is we're going to use the left side.

We're going to get people in by saying, hey, you got risk.

What have you been doing about the risk?

Let's talk about the risk.

OK, that's fine.

We're going to get other people in the room who are going to be talking about the same risk, but people never met each other before.

And then by the time they leave the room, they're going to be in the right-hand side of the design.

That's how the governance is going to shift.

We're going to hook them with something they recognize, like the fish guy.

We're going to hook them with the thing on the left, which is, hey, risk.

We're going to talk about risk.

That's what the Atlas of Risk – I'll send it around to the other folks, but some of you have it.

It's 870 different information risks that are shared by people now because –

Digital stuff has made everybody have trouble.

So they come for the risks they know, but by the time they leave, they're going to be organized into different groups that aren't going to be dealing with the risks.

The existing risk description was just a way to get them in the room.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Yes.

So one metaphor before, Stephen, instead of let's measure your blood, measure your blood, measure your blood so that we can measure your risk of the disease.

This is like, how could we be doing active inference on health and working towards health in a way that, yeah, maybe we'll do a measurement here or there.

And we do want to reduce risk and we will reduce risk.

but we're actually framing it in a way that's like a journey related to health in mind, rather than ambiguity, risk, disease, negative, negative, negative, uncertainty, anxiety.

How about yin and yang with a little bit of a more balanced understanding about how we can function and enact policy?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
This is a very important diagram, actually.

like you're saying this this takes us away from just trying to reduce uncertainty about the external stimuli and the kind of locked in risk aversion and you're actually working more with that time dependent or time series um approach that active influence gives of like well how are things changing and how just like that fish looking at the at the fly how does that um embodied agent

And the wisdom and recognizing that there's a wisdom about how to be in the world and how to be with your niche.

How is that actually being used to inform how we make things happen and not just this more mechanical approach?


SPEAKER_00:
yes and good points there um in active inference stream 19 yonder in mid april uh we're gonna have deeply felt affect which is one of the papers that was cited in this paper but we're gonna go into it in more detail we'll talk about perception about anticipation action

Metacognition, implicit metacognition.

And just to close out, I listed a few questions.

Do people want to hang out for a few more minutes and talk for a little bit?

Yeah, it sounds good, but I'll just give the closing slide and then we'll return to the question slide.

Thanks everyone for participating.

The live viewers have a link to a feedback form in the event.

Everyone else really thanks so much for 2020.

super special and unique experience for all of us so really deeply appreciated for those watching live or in replay or whenever wherever it was great times so thanks a lot and we're just getting started so for a little bit longer whoever wants to stay and if you want to leave just just no worries just drop off but um what's something that somebody wants to go into here or what's something that still people want to bring up


SPEAKER_08:
One of the things I'm wondering about is just the, we've been taking this from a single individual perspective to some extent, and in those group perspectives, it's interesting that the simultaneity of all of it, that you simultaneously have an individual, how do we get a handle, how do we help people get a handle on the many levels that operate simultaneously, and then

one of the then then how do we bring that to the current time the now where everyone is acting in this moment you know reading another paper now in fractal time and they said hey the past and the future don't exist if they do where are they show me right so the idea is now is all that exists so we have these priors which were that and we have these future projections which are that but we have the now and we all act in the now and all these myriad

dynamics feed into the now.

And so it's such an interesting notion to me of how to trim tab systems.

As a lawyer, we don't just observe.

We're always trying to push things in one direction or another for clients, right?

Or for whatever.

And so it feels like it's such an interesting thing that we have.

It's not just a now.

We have a series of nows available to us, I guess.

Because in the diagram, you see a series of nows, right?

In the steps.

So...

It's interesting to that temporal aspect is something that's just not brought into so many systems, right?

They're so static in so many ways.

And so in a sense, like when you work with standards people, they'll say, oh, it has to be robust so that we can plan based on it, but it also has to be flexible.

And it feels like this naturally, this analysis naturally lends itself once it becomes an institutionalized thing, because our institutions now are not

built on these analyses but once they're built on the dynamics when they're built on i'll use the word uncertainty but it's really embracing uncertainty or as i said in 2014 i called it entropy engines we were actually mining disorder in order to create order so anyway just a couple of things that thoughts that came to mind it feels like that time issue is relevant to our understanding how we can mine disorder cool stephen


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, the time issue is definitely a big part.

And we see that with these papers.

We've seen that there's the narrative

there's the reflective and now they're trying to get into the pre reflective more and traditionally that's been you know meditation but what is the way that we understand these different timescales and I what I'd be interested in is is how does this link in with affordances I think there's something really interesting about that niche and the affordances in a niche because it gives away

Because it's sort of permanent.

The path could still be there, the cups can still be there, yet my interaction with it can vary.

So I think that that's a really interesting way that experiments can tie a lot of this information or knowledge together.


SPEAKER_00:
Sure.

So one idea we've talked a lot about is the idea of attracting sets or attracting states.

So for the perspective of your body with regards to temperature, you want to be attracting back to core body temperature.

Excursions outside of that range are not just bad, they're lethal.

So attracting states are really important.

And just like you can have attracting sets of states on a single number line, like temperature, you can have

in the wandering itinerant dynamics of thought you can have attracting thoughts and you can ruminate and you get too attracted or it can be too precise but it's an idea that people could be familiar with or not that attracting states can be thoughts so let's think about active inference the framework as an attracting state as something where we can in a room bring up these ideas and refocus the discussion or potentially expand or zoom in so

we've brought up this multi-scale and the deep past and the deep future.

So it's multi-scale through space, like the nested systems, and then there's multi-scale through time.

There's molecules vibrating and then there's longer term things.

So let's start with the multi-scale space and time just being our starting position.

And then Active Inference goes further.

It says, not just is it going to start being multi-scale in space and time,

But there's going to be non-linearity and uncertainty because there are causes in the world.

So RJ and his alarm clock and his dog and something that you wouldn't expect changed in the world.

And that changed another part of the world that you basically wouldn't have expected.

And also our action is always going to be constrained by our situational affordances in the niche.

So to Steven's point there, which is like, it's all good to think about objectively what's happening, but constrained by affordances in the niche that we're actually in is the operating conditions we have.

So it makes sense to at least ground the discussion in the affordances.

And then we're presented with attracting set of questions like, how will we work together to be agents in a system of the type we would like to see?

That's a question that in various settings, people could say, oh, well, we don't have clarity on what kind of system we want to be in.

We need to reduce our uncertainty about what kind of system we're in.

That's visioning and clarifying mission.

But then there's other times where people say, yeah, how do we be the agents of this kind of a system that we want to be in?

So we're not uncertain about the mission, about the end cybernetically.

But I'm just like honestly confused about what next role I should take in this system to make this happen according to this mission that we've laid out.

And if my actions are consistent with the mission as we've laid it out, then they're good.

But if they're not, then they're just not helpful.

So we can start to combine a lot of these ideas and realize hopefully that whether we go deep into the physics side or into another aspect of active inference, we'll use it as an attracting set and as this range in phase space where we can bring the discussion and help ground it in the multi-scale insights in the non-linearity of the world and a few other things.

But I think it's really, yeah.


SPEAKER_08:
And they really are.

They really are that, like, we start our diagram with entities that have priors, right?

We're not starting, I mean, you could start with no priors, and you're just wandering around in the dark in the woods.

But we're starting with a system that has something that we comparing the reality to, right?

So they're trying to minimize the difference between their expectation and reality.

Is that the free energy notion?

Right.

So so sculpting expectations at the front end is what education is an experience.

Right.

And so, you know, and when we can, you know, our system is our educational system.

The United States is set up for after the based on the Prussian revolution.

school system right that's the um these the de-schooling society book by um illich um so where our expectation is industrial workers well now we don't have industrial workers only we have service workers and so our educational system is not serving our folks for instance right so we have these um the those influences it's the the i guess the the thing that's

the thing I keep coming back to, it's like a situated cognition that we situate our cognition and externalities.

Well, those externalities also have our entities that have Markov blankets.

You know, right now we're thinking together, right?

This is like Plato.

You said, you know, dialogue lets us query consciousness.

So we're doing that.

And each of us has our own view on, on the direction of this thing.

Right.

But they're,

So we're not interacting with static things.

We're interacting with dynamic things that have their own dynamics.

And the recruitment of those populations is, I think, a lot of what happens in legal concepts.

It's what right now, I think the things we're doing right now could make a big impact on ethics discussions.

Because ethics, anything that's not written down in law but is bad is now called an ethical problem.

Right.

It's just ethics is carrying a lot of water right now for anxieties of people generally with the technologies and exponential increase in everything.

So it feels like we have an opportunity for intervention because there is a vacuum of meaning in the current institutions.

And it feels like this kind of explanation might be a nice way to get a toehold there.


SPEAKER_00:
Let me build on that, Scott.

So there was a book I read called Legal Systems Very Different From Our Own by a fellow with the last name of Friedman, but it is not myself or a relative directly.

And it really does a great job of capturing how different legal systems from informal like criminal or prison legal systems, justice systems, using the term quite broadly to different world traditions.

very, very different processes that they followed, but also they had different ends in mind.

Now, the current operating environments, not just are we being confronted with different interfaces mixing that hadn't combined before, but also there's new challenges.

And so that's sort of like there was a two-stroke engine and a two-stroke engine and a two-stroke engine, and they all were kind of coupled in a way where they all were working internally.

And now they're being cobbled together and there's a lot of heat

informationally, so to speak.

There's a lot of parts that can burn because there's so much heat being wasted with the interfaces.

And so can three two stroke engines be simply rewired into a six stroke engine?

Well, no, it doesn't really work that way.

How can you link those engines together into a system?

And that's really the question we're addressing here is narratively, linguistically, memetically, but just formally as well.

How will these different systems get cobbled together so that we're actually connecting the gasoline to the car moving in forward one direction and in one piece, not taking gasoline and making something that's just combustible, but only hurting people?


SPEAKER_08:
Yep.

This is where I suggested people read Flatland.

because it's the adding of dimensions, right?

You add, Mr. Sphere comes in and lifts Mr. Square up and he can see through, you can untie a knot in the upper dimension without crossing the knot, the rope, right?

So in law, what we do is you create a new dimension.

So there was a time when we didn't have credit cards and people used to run IOUs at the bar and things like that.

It just didn't exist.

And so credit cards now serve this huge function.

They de-risk huge swaths of interactions, right?

But at one point, they just didn't exist.

And this guy, Dee Hock, wrote a book called The Birth of the Chaotic Age.

And it's kind of a crappy book, but it's kind of an interesting notion.

The banks were like, no, no, no, no, no.

We don't want your credit cards.

Go away.

Get out of here.

It was a paradigm shift.

And then eventually they got the credit cards, got in, and now try taking the credit card fees away from the banks.

So what was impossible becomes inevitable.

And it feels like because things are so stuck, this kind of approach that we're talking about when taken in markets and institutions is going to that extra dimension of credit cards or swaps freeze up.

It allows for these interactions to take place, just like the extra dimension in Flatland allowed for Mr. Square to get new perspectives on his life and his existence.

So it's a really, it's a fundamentally different, and that's why it's so interesting, the Markov blanket nesting,

gets really interesting.

Which Markov blanket can nest within another one?

And when you have communities of interest, one of the things I always remind people of in New York, for instance, you have Little Italy, you have Chinatown, you have different areas where people go together because their Markov blankets, their language is easier.

It's easier to communicate, lowers the cost of communication, lowers the risk.

You also have the jewelry district, the flower district, and the cookware district.

Economically, people cluster together.

So communities of interest, they're co-locating.

Well, here, if we look at your diagram with the four states, you know, the two states on left, two states on right, everyone is now going to communities of interest based on the dynamics or rigidity of that left-hand two states.

You know, oh, do you share a risk?

Do you share a solution?

But what if we could have communities of interest accumulated based on their capacity for change instead or something like that?


SPEAKER_00:
Just to raise one really important piece then, Stephen, is when people align around on the left side of that figure, reducing risk or shared policy or shared culture, it's often a similarity clustering, okay?

So people often cluster based upon similar needs, similar understanding of the world, similar affordances.

But let's imagine the reality of the organism, which is that actually it's a clustering on the opposite in some senses of disjoint abilities.

So in this context of the body, if you said, well, there's one kind of cell, it can't move.

It just holds a bunch of fat and it literally just does hormone and fat processing.

And there's another kind of cell that will just dry out in a second in the sun, but it can contract once.

And there's this other kind of and it's like you'd say they're not going to live in the same neighborhood together.

It's like, oh, wait, no, they do.

That's the body.

And so how are we going to interpret this?

All the levels of what it means to be a person economically and culturally and psychologically?

and understand that it's neither simple affinity nor simple disaffinity on any scale that will lead to function because function and the islands of function are rare in the almost unimaginably large state space of possible legal codexes or possible programmings that could be done or possible personalities it's like there's more ways to fail for far from equilibrium systems

And selection is the hand that just keeps on sweeping the ones that aren't working off the table.

So if we don't want to get swept off the table, we're going to be working together.

That means coming together across our differences so that we can have these non-linear successes as larger systems.

Not the largest system.

It's not a simple imperative, but at the largest level that accomplishes our mission.

So just such interesting topics.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
yeah and this well just like you were just saying there about these different cultures and the niche construction i think this can help there's a lot of problems in terms of discourse around this not more broadly in the world and i've like when we talk about systems out there in like

cities but then well how much is a system how much has been an evolving niche construction some of which is constructed in this kind of linear you know this kind of teleological strategic way from above and and geographical way but and um but also some of it's just because that's the way it's evolved over time with some of this like we say these dynamics which i think haven't really been brought in

or if they are brought in they kind of ends up in the arts and it it all gets framed in whichever metaphor a particular sort of school is applying and that you can get trapped by that and i think this this actually came up for me today so just like you're talking about the indigenous

ways you could have a governance or other ways is I think that we have this idea of systems and these different systems and how do we integrate them and is this assumption that they we need to be integrating them but

like these indigenous systems you know it flips from one to the other so for instance we have our western system which seems to be like and we need to attack our system is quite a sort of a progressive leftist approach or we need to all revert to some sort of native indigenous system and they had it right and the body knows everything and if we just listen to our body and there's this kind of

gap whereby how do you find a way which is kind of maybe configuring different approaches?

So it's like, okay, well, where can we configure the other ways of knowing, the other ways of governing, other ways of, and it's not just a case of like mash them together because they may just have a completely different dynamical process and then they don't integrate.

They just do different things at different times like cells do in the body.


SPEAKER_00:
Of course, it's all going to come down to the details.

So, you know, none of these metaphors or, you know, questions are even the beginnings of the answer.

But yes, that's definitely where we want to be understanding at that level of societies is understanding.

how much formal integration will there be?

Now, if somebody says, I designed the interface for different operations, that is still coming from a cultural context.

So the challenge and part of the quest will be to frame that interface in a way that doesn't pretend that it has the neutral arbiter ability, because that's actually one of those universalist fallacies that were fallen into by abstractionists.

Now we want to be grounded in action and still talk about an interface for action.

And so I think actually that's why the task may be easier than the thought

bringing together could be the action bringing together.

I'm always reminded of Scott's example that he told me a long time ago with two lumber yards that are competing in the market for selling lumber, but then they have the same insurance.

And then I was like, wait, they also could have the same internet provider and they could pay taxes to the same local government and they could have the same lunch service.

It's like everything except for lumber.

So it's like, how many fronts?

They might even share a fence.

So many areas.

so they're almost collaborative on more fronts than not and so how do we take this understanding that on overwhelming number of our edges and even for each edge on most of the domains there's just massive areas where we're in alignment and then risk can be catastrophic so it's like if we just reduce the amount of cascading failures in the system

by playing to our strengths in the areas where we are aligned, maybe all of a sudden now the lumberyard people, it's like, oh, you like this kind of wood?

I like this kind of wood.

We should just niche partition, but we're not gonna go niche partition and fork and never talk.

If you're gonna be selling the luxury and I'm gonna be selling the consumer wood, we need to have a better communication interface.

Oh, you have employees who speak this language and I have employees who speak this language.

Well, let's make an agreement that we're gonna send numbers back and forth in this file type on these dates.

and here's who we're gonna go to if that doesn't work.

It's like, wow, these two companies were fighting on the market in a previous or a different paradigm.

They might've been wasting money on advertising or committing different sort of gray zone interferences with each other's operation.

But just by reframing it in this multi-scale system,

Even if you're not doing a government change, whatever government system there is, those two lumber yards now have a new way of talking to each other, to their employees, with their lawyers, whatever, potentially in a way that could lead towards them working together better.

So that's just very powerful.

I think that's what will be cool to continue returning to.


SPEAKER_08:
And we're moving there really from a zero-sum game to a non-zero-sum game.

There's a winner and loser.

And what you do, that's why I always think of that.

You add the dimensionality and it recasts the game as not a winning and losing game.

And that's what we have to do in Gaia theory.

If you want to save the world from us, we have to recast the game as the entire game.

The Sustainable Development Goals, even the UN has them.

They're even tripping over them because they have some.

They had one power plant they developed, the Gujarat Power Plant in Bangladesh, and they scored big score on energy SDG and on development SDG.

And then they got sued by the local fishermen and the local population for pollution, which screwed them on the other SDG.

They didn't even talk among the SDGs.

the un now that's not surprising if you know the un and the institution but it shows you that it's even it's hard to integrate even when you have the the same source of the norms or the or the aspirations they just go for it on one of them and they don't they're not talking to each other right and here's why preventing failure is so critical um which body is healthier


SPEAKER_00:
each organ system at 90% function or most of them at 99 and one is at zero.

Well, that body is dead.

So all of the functions need to be adequate or better.

And we need to improve adequate, improve resiliency, improve accessibility, et cetera.

But preventing failure cannot be just part of the discussion on reducing risk.

Reducing cascading failure has to be an imperative.

And so in that framework where we want multiple components to be functioning, it just reframes the, oh, should the government be interfering here?

Or should this person be undertaking this policy?

And again, like I said, like the task to synchronize on action might be easier than thought.

So those two lumber yards, getting them to go to the same religious institution or send their children the same education or listen to the same YouTube channels, why?

Why even go down that road in the metaphor when you could just offer them a service

where they're de-risking their lumber business.

So instead of saying, we'll synchronize these lumber yard people on this, and then they'll just act nicely together.

It's like, yeah, or you could just provide the interface so that whoever they are, however things change, they'll be able to play nicely together instead of just saying, well, if we synchronize them in this way, then they'll know what to do.

They won't because people don't.


SPEAKER_08:
Well, and that's why one of the things that I talk to people about is I say our recruitment that I'm doing in the program at the lab,

is not based on selflessness.

It's based on self-interest.

And the assertion is that they can de-risk in ways they cannot do unilaterally, period.

That's what I tell people.

And so you get together.

So it's a commitment.

If they want to de-risk in these new ways, they can't do it by themselves, just like a stoplight.

I didn't send out around a memo saying, let's all stop at the red light.

That was done.

Right.

These are these are scales that we can't do unilaterally.

And so that tempting that bait of saying you can go over there and with swaps, Australia swaps were outlawed when they first came out and the banks in Australia were getting killed because they couldn't swap out their interest rate risk.

So they lobbied the Australian government to allow for swaps.

And then they did allow for swaps and they were able to swap out their interest rate risk.

Like other banks, the downside is they all then got hurt in 2008 when the swaps were used for speculative purposes.

That's a different problem.

But that invitation to de-risk in ways you can't do alone, it's a crass way of getting people in the space.

But to me, it's the hook that joins that left-hand side and the right-hand side with those four spheres.

Because on the left-hand side, you have this characterization of risk as a zero-sum game.

On the right-hand side...

Well, maybe it's not a zero-sum, non-zero-sum in that context, but it allows for a bigger dimensionality of de-risking increases when you increase the system size.

And so if you get those people who are similarly situated together, it's new markets.

That's what trade associations are.

Trade associations, people are competing all the potato chips, lumber, it doesn't matter.

Trade association competitors get together and what do they do?

Share information and insurance.

Those are the two big things.

They co-insure for whatever risks they share and they can buy insurance cheaper of whatever kind.

They also share information so they can understand situational awareness better.


SPEAKER_00:
I put up the slide here again.

yeah yvonne so do you have anything you want to add or remark on no just chilling yeah okay continue scott wait weirdly i think we just lost scott's audio in between oh no okay okay okay sorry continue uh


SPEAKER_08:
But I was thinking there was some other thing I was going to say, but I can't remember now about that.

Oh, yes, yes.

This is an example from the fisheries industry.

So this Eleanor Ostrom worked very closely with people in the fisheries.

So a lot of fisheries are designed with Ostrom notions of the commons.

And one of the things that a friend of mine who works in the – hold on a second –


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, Stephen, any... Okay, sorry.


SPEAKER_08:
One of the guys who works in the fishing industry said they had a problem.

They have this thing called bycatch, and it's the fish you're not supposed to catch.

So let's say, I'm going to make up these numbers and the species, but let's say you're allowed to catch 200,000 pounds of flounder

but they would orange rockfish or yellow rockfish.

And if you catch four pounds of that, you have to stop fishing.

It's a protected species.

You can't fish anymore.

You can't pay your bills.

You can't buy the oil.

You can't send your kids to school.

You don't, you don't have money.

So what they did, they were trying to figure out how are we going to protect this orange rockfish or yellow rockfish?

So what they did is they said, okay, let's pool the allocations of different fisheries.

So

If they had three guys, each had a four-pound allocation, so they can pool it and make a 12-pound allocation.

Then what happens is if one of the people goes out and fishes and catches five pounds of yellow rockfish, he can still fish, whereas he might in the past have had to stop, so he spread the risk out.

But then what happens is the other fishermen start to be policemen.

because they're cutting into their allocation.

So they go over and they say, hey, hey, hey, use a different size net or don't fish in that area, whatever.

They share information because he's cutting in.

It's an economic loss for all of them because they pulled their allocation.

So to me, that's a big deal, that idea.

Because what they're doing is they're spreading risk.

And when you spread risk, it's like insurance.

If more people have claims out there and my premiums go up,

Right.

So I'm going to encourage things that make things safer.

Right.

As a stakeholder in that system.

And so similarly here, it feels like when you move to that right side diagram, we're going to have more avenues with which to create information flows among the parties that will actually de-risk better than the left side and make it cheaper.

Stephen, and then I'll have a point on that.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think this use of this diagram could be important because, yeah, in a way, I suppose this diagram on the left, it's like you either just put in laws or to mitigate those risks and challenges or the transdisciplinary tool that we have at our disposal is money.

Money is the thing that everyone uses basically as the transdisciplinary allocation of what to do on projects.

And it doesn't, it's probably,

highly problematic, and there's not really a lot of other things apart from what budget gets allocated that allows that.

So is there a way that this can provide us, and at different scales, because sometimes, yes, it's fairly clean at kind of a national level or, you know, you have your rulers level and the individual, but most stuff's happening in between as we're talking about.

How can we somehow get a handle which is not too culturally...

or metaphorically constructed, but is maybe relatively universal.

I know it's bad to use that term, but I think there's something in that, in being able to say, okay, this is how this information gain is happening.

This is how this, you know, and now you're starting to have a way to talk about dynamics in ways which aren't normally possible.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah one thought on that and again to this point about you want to design the Nexus the interface in a way that is inclusive and accessible but respects that not just do people disagree but they have actually different visions and understandings about this whole system that we're in and so here's and then

where we can tie it to this figure and how it could be used to communicate and maybe even organize around.

So on the left side, it leads towards abstraction because it's like, well, let's wait until we're less ambiguous.

And then once you have no ambiguity, it's like, well, let's figure out what the least risky policy is.

But guess what?

All the policies have risks.

And even if there was one that somehow had less risk than strictly all the others, there's still black swan events and there's still people with different preferences for a given pipeline for oil or for a given fishing agreement.

So the idea that you're going to minimize risk for all parties in a way that they're satisfied with is going to be this quest that you're going to be at the drawing board quite probably forever.

Let's contrast that with the right side.

And, you know, the authors, I hope, will be okay with us taking wide latitude because, you know, we're taking this figure beyond what it's framed, but that's what's fun, right?

Now, let's go to that drawing board with the power plant and the fissures and the ostrum and everything like that instead of just getting frozen on the drawing board on the left.

So now I'm on the right side, and we're saying, look, we are at the drawing board.

So whether we're speaking through a translator or you believe that we have different interests, we're here at the nexus.

So universal aside, what's locally going to be working for our system?

Well, we have two imperatives.

We want to make maximum information gain, but we want to maximize, if you look at that ISO given P, it's not information gain on the observations.

That's this part.

See how it's strictly in the O?

Here's ambiguity about state observations, okay?

This is maximizing information gain on states and observations given policy.

In other words, we're not just reducing our ambiguity about states of the world, like give me a more accurate stock ticker.

This is like, hey, what's the most informative policy that we can enact to learn about the states?

So we wanna query the markets in a way that isn't just getting increased precision on viewing them.

And so now we're all at the table together.

So whether we believe ourselves to have or actually have adversarial interest in one dimension of 300 or all the dimensions or whatever, we have an expansive maximization growth oriented goal together, which is implementing policy that helps us understand our system and the mapping between the hidden states

the observations better together now by doing that we're also engaging in joint action which will prepare us for larger and better action and what are we doing joint action to do well part of it is to be consistent with the kind of system who we believe ourselves to be but the other part the minimization what we're running away from the stick is disorder with respect to the observations

So not with respect to us getting paralyzed about which policy, but we wanna reduce our surprise about our observations in the context of optimal policy.

Okay, so here, how much CO2 is there really in the world?

And how much do we really make?

And what would be the riskiest policy?

And should we just remove gas cars?

And I mean, you could go down this rabbit hole forever, right?

Here is, here's a predicted trajectory.

Here's different types of models and what they predict about the trajectory of CO2 levels through time.

And we want to reduce our uncertainty about that model together.

All kinds of people who believe different things.

We're going to reduce our uncertainty purely about observations as we jointly use policy together to learn more.

It's just such a positive way of framing it.

And again, people are still going to disagree, but we're coming to the table together.

So as long as we're not at arms and we're coming to the table together, we don't need to go universal.

We don't need to go culture free.

We just say we're here.

We're figuring this out today for ourselves now and for other people later.


SPEAKER_08:
And when you, that's beautiful.

I mean, I, I can't wait till I have more facility with the concepts because I, what you're describing

the processes you're describing are going to become governance.

It's not like we're going to find governance of the processes.

Those processes will be governance.

That's how it's going to happen.

And so the question is, we're on the left side.

How do we get to the right side?

What are the stages that we can do to move us over there?

How do we prepare ourselves as groups to be able to function on the right side in a natural, organic kind of way?

One of the things that I've been advocating for is collecting practices from the left side.

but then having groups stare at the practices so you can say, okay, let's, it's basically making different, changing the assembly, right?

The disintermediation of the left side has been done by the internet, it's done by COVID, it's done by the big challenges to those systems.

They reveal the limitations of those systems.

And so the disintermediation is done.

On the right side, we're going to reintermediate because there is still mediation of the individual components in the system, right?

They're brought together.

but we're re-intermediating with a fundamentally, it's fundamentally different in some ways and in some ways it's quite similar.

And so one of the things that I'm interested in is trying to find ways to make it so similar that people don't even realize, you know, or they're comfortable with the move to this new framing of analysis.

Very cool.

Yeah, Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
And this ties in as well.

Actually, this is so good that you've gone through this diagram.

So it makes it very much jump out.

But this is like the safe to fail approach of trying to... So if you imagine that policy wheel, the red wheel on the right-hand side, you know,

active influence knows that that's really our choices that are what we do with our policy we we a lot of what's out there in the world the hidden states you know we only have so much control over so if we're able to almost shift the policies in there

and knowing that they're safe to shift, so these safe to fail experiments, which is what they talk about with, so if you do safe to fail policies, which means that you can then observe the states, observe what observations, observe the overlaps, observe the dynamics over time,

then you've got an awful lot of new information that you can use.

And obviously the key is not to have something in there which will be, there's this anti-fragile comes into that as well.

So you can learn as you do.

And obviously knowing that there will be certain times when you've got to pull away

stick to a risk minimization focus, but it gives a way to talk about that, probably to people from very different views of the world.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

So another metaphor there with performance would be like a martial art and the safe to fail and the sparring and the play.

So there's times to play for children and there's times to be serious, but no matter what you're doing, it's always serious because people can fall.

If you're walking, you can fall.

If you're talking, you can say something mean.

If you're holding data, you can lose the data.

So everything is very important.

And so we need to have that resilience in mind.

One other way in which this can be used, so this is putting a little bit beside this purely somebody at the table who doesn't want to communicate with us scenario.

So now we're in a situation where people want to work together.

At least they've bought on to that level.

We're talking about the system and someone just has this figure up, you know, just as they do.

And Steven, you said it, like what we control is policy.

We control climate policy.

You know what we don't control?

The climate.

But what do we control?

Our climate policy.

We don't control biogeochemical cycles.

We influence them, but we don't control the outcome.

And so people could be talking and someone's like, well, I want to see this.

Okay, you're talking about C. You're talking about your preference vector.

And someone said, or are we talking about the state of the world?

Are you actually saying that this is how people feel?

Or are you just stating your preferences about the world?

Because it's fine if you want to, you know, I want to learn about your preferences.

And remember, your preferences are the key factor that really go into our policy

but our policy is not the same thing as the states about the world.

So it's like, okay, now what are the observations?

Someone says, no, no, no, actually it's 80%.

So, okay, your inference is that this is 80%.

Is that right?

Well, here's this observation.

Oh, well, this study is biased.

Okay, well, great.

Let's, you know, what if it was a factor of two?

So there's so many ways just to have this figure up and someone says, are you sure about that policy selection?

Say, okay, well, it sounds like we're up here.

It sounds like we're in the metacognitive world.

We're thinking implicitly about our own group's generative model of this policy decision making process.

And it seems like you're uncertain about this.

And what are you uncertain about?

Okay, what could we reduce our uncertainty about?

Is it your preferences?

Is it the way that your preferences and our uncertainty are being combined with the affordances and the niche into policy?

That, of course, is the hardest knot to untie.

That's control theory and everything.

But you can at least say, hey, is it your uncertainty?

Is it your preferences?

Is it the niche perception affordances?

not just the preferences but the niche itself e the prior and is that being combined in a way that makes sense to generate policy because if you if you disagree with the policy which part of these was it because that's all that went into it so don't just say you disagree with the policy tell me do you want something to be do you value something that wasn't valued by this policy okay now that we're talking about a given policy

Do we have synchronization, at least coarsely, on the starting state?

Not on all the details, but at least the starting state for our scenario.

And are we talking about states of the world?

Do you believe that our policy is going to influence the beat?

You think that cutting the miles per gallon to 20 is going to change the way that the hidden state, CO2 in the world, changes through time?

You think it's going to do that.

Well, I don't think it's going to do that.

Or I think it's going to do this instead.

And so now we have an interface.

OK, policy is how states of the world are changing, not just as a function of models of prediction, but as a function of our interference in the system.

and it's going to be manifested in observables not just we believe that 80 of this will be happening by this future time but rather as a function of policy we're going to see these observables and if we're surprised by the observables we see along the way we're going to be course correcting and we're going to be at the same table again so there's so many actual structural ways to talk about this

I think, as well as narratively, that people could, even having this up, maybe it could be simpler than this one, maybe it could have a few more pieces, but just separating out where people disagree, it's like, yeah, in a legal, I don't know, yeah, in a legal system, I can imagine this being useful too.


SPEAKER_08:
Oh, it would have to be recast as something that people wouldn't, you know, fall out of their chair because legal people don't like to see squiggly Latin and Greek symbols.

But the...

But the absolutely, no question, the way you described it, what you're doing is you're really mapping.

I mean, it's teaching and showing people, you know, whenever you have a map that says you are here, you know, when you're lost in the zoo or something like that.

And really it's a you are here map, right?

It's a CGE, you know, it's allowing more granularity and it's offering more dimensionality for solutions, right?

Because if people are just talking about policy, there'll be ambiguity if they're not talking about C, G or E.


SPEAKER_00:
Yes.

Yeah.

What are your preferences?

C, what are the field of affordances?

E, and the prior over those, like the quote nuclear option.

It's an affordance and it's the last resort.

So tied up in the affordance is how likely it is.

That's your prior over policies.

So you have the field of affordances and the prior about them.

And then you have your preferences.

C, I want to see a world where there isn't radioactive fallout.

And then you have your uncertainty.

And then those get combined in a way that is formalized with G. And that relates to pi, policy selection, being the outcome of the free energy being minimized, which is, again, what's the most likely policy?

And someone's like, wait, most likely?

It's like, right, but most likely under the model of the world that you believe will happen, not just the one that you think is like the run of the mill, because quote, the run of the mill is not run of the mill.


SPEAKER_08:
Yeah.

It's really interesting because, I mean, you're integrating subjectivity into an analysis of the reality in a formal way.


SPEAKER_00:
It has that.

I believe that this is where the dual instrumentalism is the most powerful thing in the FEP zone.

So the dual instrumentalism, again, it's also kind of like a Bailey and Mott.

I don't know if that's being mispronounced, but where there's a strong and a weak form of an argument.

So again, the strong claim would be this is what systems are and this is how they're operating.

That is what a bacteria is.

That is what the Markov blanket is.

But the actual weaker claim is just we're going to use it as an instrument.

It's like we use linear regressions and time series modeling to model GDP through time or regression of, you know, height versus risk for some disease.

It's like it didn't say people are linear regressions by doing that.

it did lead to a world in which certain types of conclusions were reached but it wasn't that people were linear models it was actually consequences so this is just a different statistical model and as we're exploring today and we'll continue to explore even qualitatively it helps structure

messy discussions about adversarial relationships.

And in that way, which we're only barely scratching the surface of, like, you know, really formalizing the Markov blankets around companies and things like that, having this type of a structuring and being able to be disambiguous, but it could be

so much more it could be translated between languages it could be versions it could have impartial um you know trust providing uh groups there's so much that could be done there and it's funny because so one of the books i have on the shelf here is by hanneman it's called doing money and it's about how money is a universal risk consolidator


SPEAKER_08:
So, you know, you get money and you can take care of your other risks, basically.

So one of the things I've been wondering about is, well, money's kind of turned into data because you don't really spend cash anymore.

So why can't data itself, without being monetized, be a universal risk mitigator?


SPEAKER_00:
Stephen, you cracked me up when you said that money was transdisciplinary.

I've never heard, you know, people say that transdisciplinary research, but I've never, it's so true though.

The departments will pay each other in money.

They won't cite each other, but they'll pay each other.

So it's so true.


SPEAKER_08:
And so, and so that, but data can data now be, and can this system.

because money we we you go to an airport you got to convert one system into another so there's different encoding of the bills themselves right okay so that's but but ultimately i was so people if i walk out of if i'm outside a courthouse and someone says i just got a ten thousand dollar judgment i don't know if it's for a divorce case a slip and fall i mean it's money it's ten thousand dollars is identical can buy the same amount of groceries but it could be for various different things that you were you were compensated right

In data, it feels like this model might allow us to have data be a medium of exchange and maybe storage.

I don't know.

I won't go into that right now.

But a medium of exchange of risk without having to go through the monetary loop.


SPEAKER_00:
Very, very interesting.

Yep.

I can kind of imagine some areas, Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
And this might be where bringing the body back in can help too, as we, you know, you talk about like, there's money in my hand, there's money that we talk about when you get it or something, and then there's capital, which is almost like an augmented,

um cognition process which is up there in the markets you know that we've offloaded onto and is very hard to embody what's going on up there it's it's like it goes off it does its calculation it comes back

Half the people doing it are doing it on screens who themselves are being proxies for other people.

So there's a question about where this comes back into ultimate sense-making at different timescales.


SPEAKER_08:
Ivan was smiling before.

Were you smiling at the money thing, Ivan?


SPEAKER_00:
Let's maybe have, yeah, let's have anything you want to go there, Ivan, if you want.

Otherwise, let's have a little closing.


SPEAKER_06:
I just imagined in you and your money and your money of new people.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

so maybe we'll have a final set of thoughts so prepare that but the other side um scott of the the money uh trading in the airport is that uh in a healthy system every sale is bi-directionally consensual every agreement is not feeling forced it's like so somebody wanted your

Peso, the other person wanted the yen.

So they made a deal.

They met in a marketplace.

They wouldn't have found it on Craigslist.

The operating costs would have been too high, but somebody wanted it.

Now, when does it become deranged?

Well, when there's extra market forces that force people to do things, or when there's devaluation and market manipulation, et cetera, et cetera,

But again, it's not like there's a pure untrammeled market out there.

And then it's like, oh, regulation, how dare they?

It's actually we construct the market.

It's like we're building the bowl.

So it's not just like there's a pure bowl and then you've defiled it by putting clay on it.

It's like, no, what is the structure that you're going to be interfacing in?

And can that not just be imbued with our values, which...

aren't going to always have justification they're often axiomatic but can it actually allow diverse agents to act according to their deeply held axioms so that there is ability of people who have different faith in different things yeah and it's been a joke for so long oh you don't need to believe in the legitimacy of the government to use the currency of a fiat and now we're just seeing it in a new light


SPEAKER_08:
It's really interesting.

The market may be just an emergence from the fact of information seeking in trades.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

And also leveraging and how that's trust.

Like there's Bitcoin on the blockchain.

These are the examples I think about.

Yep.

But then there's the 10x leveraged Bitcoin.

Who legitimized that exchange or that person to offer a 10x leverage or some other type of asset based upon leveraged on Bitcoin?

Nobody gave that permission.

Yep.

if that person or that operation is reputable um and to whatever extent it is it will succeed or hopefully and again anything other than that is dysfunction so there's a way to talk about that in a way that is pretty different from the reward optimization

of different competing agents.

That's previous paradigm, reward optimization, competitive agents.

And we're not just moving from competitive to cooperative.

It's actually not that simple.

It's actually more about from the reward to the precision guiding mindset and that everything else falls in line after that.

And the action and the precision are the key pieces, some of the key pieces.

And so that's the coherence lending factor.

Yes, we want to be precise about process together.

That's the minimal meme, not we're going to have abundance in the future, but today we're going to have precision here.


SPEAKER_08:
Yep.

So it's really, yeah, it's a different, it's really fascinating the way it's going to iterate itself into, it's more scalable, but it's not yet scaled.


SPEAKER_07:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_08:
You know, I think it makes me think of adaptation studies.

I have a book on Cambridge, a book on adaptation studies in theater, where if you take Romeo and Juliet and you translate it into another language, you got a lot of work to do because there's a lot of phrasing and there's a lot of behavior, a lot of things for adaptation.

What we're doing here is it's just like a giant simultaneous adaptation vehicle.

Right, because everyone's coming in with priors and this system allows people to discover things that they have in common.

It allows them to act in common.

And that's going to have such huge power.

It won't and it won't be something that will create spaces for it.

It will create the space.

The interaction space will evolve and then be.

And then it'll be parameterized in metrics and you'll know if you're in it or not.

There'll be certain behaviors that indicate you're in it.

Right.

But it's that's why I say the process becomes the governance.

It's not you don't that's a lot of people.

There's the AI problem right now, not our AI, but the artificial intelligence that everyone is trying to create.

Everyone that I can find is trying to create systems to govern the people creating the AI, but not the AI system itself.

And I'm thinking more along the lines of Asimov, which is you need the rules for the robots themselves.

Similarly here, each one of these systems is a robot, not programmed by us per se, but it's caused by us and it has

uh features that are the result of our desires and needs so it's programmed in that way corporations are robots i think they're programmed part of our constructed niche is how we would consider it it you're never going to break away it's intertwined with us it's in our niche yeah right right and so the so it's interesting because i think a lot of folks look at authority

The fiat money is, I think the U.S.

is a fiat not just because of rule of law, but because of a monopoly of violence.

We have the most guns and bombs.

And so it's violence and imperialism and all that stuff that's wrapped up in fiat money.

Right?

There's a power there.

And I think the power is shifting from physical violence to other forms of information.

I won't use the word violence here, but information authority.

And it feels like the ability of this system to declare that it can get you closer to reality continuously.

It's dynamically, it's like the scientific method.

It's dynamically rejiggering itself.

I wouldn't say closer to truth.


SPEAKER_00:
I would say towards a better process together.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.

Dynamically.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.


SPEAKER_08:
Yep, that's right.

There is no end state of truth, yep.

But that value proposition is not characteristic of the current systems.

And so it has a unique feature of it de-risks in a way that's much more effective than the current systems.

It requires people to do the cooperative thing, which is, like I said, with credit cards or ATMs or swaps or...

Anything with mitochondria.

Right.

You know, your free existing things have to come together because it's a better deal to be had.

Right.

So that's and so that so the convey are conveying why there's a better deal to be had.

We can use the existing problems in the world.

Climate change, war.


SPEAKER_00:
It's not even a better deal.

It's a better negotiating table.


SPEAKER_08:
Yes.


SPEAKER_00:
And that's that's right.

That's always the reframe is always from.

Yes, there will be better states to we're going to seek precision today.

Yes.


SPEAKER_08:
Beautiful, beautiful.

And that gets back to that now versus past and future thing that I was struggling with before.

Right.

We're not going to we're not saying it's better.

It's a better way to be.

And we don't know where being takes us because we have models of it.

You have a model.

I have a model.

We have a model.

Let's get together, figure out where we want to be.

The reality is the synthesis of those desires, I guess, as evolving through time.


SPEAKER_00:
Closing statement from first Stephen, then Yvonne, if he wants, then back to Scott.


SPEAKER_01:
Well, yeah, I suppose the takeaway

And you had the E, the G, what was the third letter again?


SPEAKER_00:
C is the preference.


SPEAKER_01:
okay see i think that's really useful i think that's like a nice meeting point there between and i keep coming back to this but the ergodicity and non-ergodicity in the sense that you know as you get down to the smaller scale the body and i think even when you get into this outside of cognition everything's got to follow that growth kind of ergodic kind of churn and then you start to have this ability to bring in these non-ergodics as we get to larger time scales and

you know we even see as we get now to the state and how you can borrow money in ways which an individual can't we've seen this with the eu because they're not constrained by lifespan in the way that mortgage mortgages are so you've got this weird ability to bring in preferences in that

um about of non-ergotic sort of ways of just making a choice and creating deliberately steady state like a fiat currency the whole point is it's steady and non-ergotic but we actually and this is where i think a lot of the work with the indigenous cultures is they are they could say they're trapped in the old cyclical way of understanding the world but actually that gives you a way to tune into your deeper existential way of knowing

about the long-term future because that is where your phenotype knowledge comes from not um you know the okay we have these structures that give us this ability to also do deep temporal depth but we do lose

the ability to integrate free energy in such a new way.

The dimensions come down and down and down and down to these kind of artifacts.

So yeah, this is, anyway, this is what is coming up for me.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Well, I hope, Stephen, that you and others can, in the future, you know, listen back to what you've laid out and hopefully see it in a broader perspective, what you were hinting at.

Yvonne, any closing thoughts for 2020, indeed?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, sure.

I just want to thank you all for a brilliant discussion and it's a great discussion for the end of this strange year.

I hope to see you all next, from the beginning, from January.


SPEAKER_00:
And thanks for your help in the project from the beginning.

Really critical.

Thank you.

Yeah, so very chill.

Scott, closing thought?


SPEAKER_08:
This is beautiful.

You guys are beautiful.

This is awesome.

I feel like a metamorphosis.

I'm going to pupate a little bit, and then I'm going to come out after the New Year's and be ready to fly with you guys.

This is really delightful and fascinating, and I think it's going to be

really um very helpful to a lot of problems that are out there in the world it feels like there's a lot of um uh solution space that gets opened up with this and in in introducing it in in digestible chunks so i always talk to my clients about where are you now where do you want to be that's a tough one and now i see why it's a tough one because it's in a way the wrong question

Where do we want to be individually?

And then how do we synthesize?

And then what are the ways to get there?

And then you triage them.

So that's a standard thing I used to use.

Now that's changing because it's a... The exploration of where we want to be is the answer to that really hard second question, which is people have difficulty answering.

So thank you for inviting me on the journey.


SPEAKER_00:
This is great stuff.

So to close on that, Scott, you just...

you laid out a helpful way of thinking about it with just where do you want to go?

This is common goal setting.

Who are we?

Where do we want to go?

How are we going to get there?

But you brought in two pieces, which is the values.

The values are what is not explicitly described, but they're part of the preference and the policy.

And so combining all of these disparate threads together and not having one heat engine for the refrigerator and one power plant for the other one,

but combining all of these threads together so we can have a discussion from multi-perspective, so that's the intercultural component, multi-perspective, but also bringing together these co-extant values that we have for system function, exploration,

so many other features, but really my closing thought is for this live stream that tomorrow probably I'm gonna record a video called 12.0 that is gonna be the clock striking midnight on 2020.

And then we will indeed head into a very exciting 2021 and beyond.

So both of you, well, actually all of you, I guess are RSVP'd for the Active Inference Lab.

So I'm just really looking forward to those,

three projects, and just like you said, Scott, with the digestible bits.

Livestream has been our learning process.

We've all learned so much along this journey.

But now we also want to be thinking about could make shorter content, ones that have interactive parts.

Who knows?

But there's going to be, yeah, great things happening ahead.

So thanks, everyone who's listening live or in replay.

Thanks, guys, for participating.


SPEAKER_08:
Fantastic.


SPEAKER_05:
And happy new year to everybody.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
Wow.

What a discussion.

What a discussion.

All right.

Well, I'm going to terminate the live stream.

So thanks everyone.

And I will talk to you later.
