## iIfDvVRgsjQ

SPEAKER_03:
Bye.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello, everyone.

Welcome to ACT-INF Lab live stream number 33.0.

It's November 18th, 2021.

Welcome to the ACT-INF Lab, everyone.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating and mute if you're not going to be speaking.

Thank you.

We're a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream.

So please provide us all with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here.

We'll be following good video etiquette for live streams and respecting our awesome facilitator, Blue.

At this short link, you can find the streams past and upcoming.

And we are about to be heading into the second half of November 2021, where on the 23rd and the 30th, we'll have two participatory group discussions on this very paper we're going to discuss today, Thinking Like a State.

And then we have yet to set the December paper.

So if you know someone who might be interested in joining or you yourself would like to discuss a paper of yours, get in touch with us.

Today in ACT-INF Stream 33.0, the goal is to learn and discuss this paper, Thinking Like a State, Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of Our Collective Minds by Avel Gwinnon-Kalu.

And the video, like all,

.Zero videos, even though we do have the author here, it's just an introduction to some of the ideas and how to pronounce them, not a review or a final word.

So we'll introduce ourself and then go into aims and claims, abstract and roadmap, keywords, figures, and formalisms, etc.

So let us know, especially if you'd like to participate in the upcoming 33.1 and 33.2.

We'll start with just an introduction of...

saying hello and what we're excited to talk about or resolve either in the dot zero or in the upcoming group discussions and then we'll culminate with the author and transfer facilitation over so i'm daniel i'm a researcher in california and

I'm just excited to check in on the progress of this important topic.

People have been theorizing about societies and cities and states and everything in between since as long as they were there, probably a little bit before.

So it's just a fun topic, and I'm really excited to see how Active Inference can give a new lens at resolving some of the longstanding questions in that area.

I'll pass it to Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, thank you, Daniel.

I'm Stephen, I'm based in Toronto and I'm really interested in the multi-scale implications of state and

niche construction particularly for me because i i'm interested in working around what i call social topographies which is probably at the scale of events and moments in people's like lived experience and in their architectures and places so i i'm really excited that this is bringing in this idea of state and larger scale but also bridging that with active inference from the kind of

past the smaller scale so yeah lots of good stuff here lots of ontological questions as well which i think is really cool um and uh i passed it over should i pass it over to blue or should i yep over to you so i'm blue i'm an independent research consultant in new mexico and i um really like this paper


SPEAKER_04:
And I really like working and talking with Avel about ideas because these ideas are kind of at a bigger scale.

I am interested in self-assembly of things like at the cellular and maybe even subcellular level.

And like this takes it to the very big level.

And I think that active inference really kind of unifies this.

It's a scale-free framework.

And so that's kind of what I'm excited to talk about today and maybe not resolve, but discuss and get some other perspectives on.

And I'll pass it to the first author of the paper, or the only author of the paper, Avel.

If you'd like to just introduce yourself, say a few words.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm Avel, also known as Servo.

I have a training in cognitive science and physics mainly.

I'm interested in philosophy and a lot of things.

What we want here is that I founded and helped organize Kairos Research, a participative citizen's laboratory, which aims to understand how to act and how to navigate contemporary social historical dynamics.

And part of this is to understand why we have states and how those states that we now have are like.

um so the goal of the paper is to basically understand how states have constituted and what it tells about their continued structural identity through ages and this of course the topic is big there are several uh kind of states but the very first thing we need to do is to understand what your state is and where it comes from and that's what i'm trying to do there


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

So moving on to the aims and claims of the paper.

So this paper, Thinking Like a State, Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of Our Collective Mind.

In the paper, it states that the core argument of this article is that states can be and should be understood as hierarchical control systems.

essentially similar in their core physical architecture to brains.

And we will leverage active inference to ground the study of intelligence in the way an organism maintains their structural autonomy to formally assess the collective brain hypothesis.

And the big question of the article is what kind of intelligence is displayed by city-state systems and how is it embodied in their structure?

So we'll go through the abstract.

Daniel, do you want to take the first section of the abstract?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, Stephen, first?


SPEAKER_02:
Oh, just one comment, just because I know you mentioned Kairos there.

And I've done an activity with the Kairos blanket.

It's like a mapping thing where you stand on parts of Canada and to look where it came from.

I don't know if that connects.

So if I'm writing, Kairos is working at that kind of regional, national scale to look at questions around that.

And from what I hear, that's informing how your research is

being approached is that correct i did not understand the question uh that's correct oh yeah it's an activity it's an activity actually not to do with the frist and blanket literally where they put a big

blanket around parts of Canada on the floor in a room and then people have to stand on it and they keep taking away bits which were basically, which were no longer in the territories of the First Nations and then you see how much is left and there's not a lot left.

so to speak.

So it's talking to that idea of statehood and settlers and how much is left.

And I wonder if that speaks to the wider work of Kairos and questions of states and how do we understand how we fit into that.

Or maybe I'm misunderstanding.


SPEAKER_01:
So that fits in the work of Kairos because it tries to bridge scales.

I never heard of this Kairos blockhead.

This is not related to what we do in India.

It helps embody an impression of how settlers have appropriated indigenous American territories.

So this is something that fits the mandate of Kairos.

But the core idea of Kairos is it's the Greek notion for time, you have three in Greek.

And Kairos is the instance and it's coded actively like it's an instance where you can seize opportunity.

And this is basically what embodied agents do.

They build skills and they build capabilities and they enact them when it's appropriate.

This is the goal of Kairos to understand and reproduce this core ability.

A lot of people have used kairos.

You have anarchists that claim that are called kairos.

You have a Christian concept that is called kairos.

You have a lot of people that make the use of the concept because it's very broad and it's very... It's not something that has been imported in the Christian concept of times, really, unlike what you have today.

So if you want to talk about this, you just use the Greek word, which is kairos.


SPEAKER_00:
Yep.

Just one thought, then I'll go to the abstract, which is that kairos, as opposed to chronos, like a chronometer with decimal time, kairos is like timeliness and it brings action and sort of a little bit of a moment that transcends the tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.

So it's a cool term.

I'll read the first third of the abstract.

This article aims to show how the deep history of early state societies entails the development of a collective form of cognitive agency.

It relates classical works in the anthropology of states, in particular Scott's Seeing Like a State, with the inactive account of biological and cognitive organization, thanks to the unified ontology for self-organization dynamics across scales offered by the active inference framework.


SPEAKER_04:
Stephen, do you want to take the next piece of the abstract?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

OK.

So active inference conceives of cognition as synchronization across individuated sensory motor states.

It entails that biological or sociocultural constraints display a minimal form of cognition by shaping the behavior of faster dynamics in a certain way.

When such constraints collectively define a basic life form,

an integrated operationally closed system, they can therefore be said to embody adaptive knowledge, properly speaking.


SPEAKER_04:
And then I'll just take the last part.

It says, the inactive inference account I articulate here strongly motivates and methodologically grounds

hoist a wholist approach in the social sciences.

Indeed, it grounds the study of human societies in the role of structural constraints, whose meaning depends both on the broader systems activity and in the historical context of their emergence.

The present account of the dynamics of early urbanization and state genesis aims to illustrate this approach.

And a quick just walk through the roadmap of the paper.

We're going to go through the introduction section and

And then there are three main sections of the article.

The embodied intelligence in nested minds is the first.

The second is the deep history of cities and states.

The third from the urban metabolism to the collective mind.

And then we'll go through the conclusion.

And first up in this dot zero contextualization video, we're going to discuss the keywords which I think

There were no official keywords, but these are the words that I created for the paper when discussing it at the conference.

So we pulled out intelligence, autonomy, embodied intelligence, active inference, the free energy principle, the concept of thinking through other minds.

And we've done that in a stream before, Daniel, is that true?

I think we have, right?

And then niche construction.

So I don't know, I don't have the facts on the exact number of the Thinking Through Other Minds stream, but we can find that out somewhere during this talk.

We'll look it up.

So, Avel, do you want to maybe speak to, we'll give you the first stab at talking about what you mean by intelligence and autonomy.

We've pulled a couple quotes out of the paper, but maybe you'd like to say a few words.


SPEAKER_01:
So if I remember well, intelligence etymologically, it's the capacity to make links, to connect dots of data and to build an integrated understanding of it.

I don't want to commit to any specific notion of intelligence because I'm not aware of any meaningful first principle definition of it.

There is a lot of work in measuring intelligence, like IQ, which maps to specific cognitive abilities and has literally zero reason to generalize to other life forms than humans.

And we could argue to other life forms than humans in occidental societies.

The notion of autonomy is much more specific.

It's important to... Okay.

So, etymologically, one's ability to build one's own world.

So, for example, if a city-state

has laws and the organs that make the law are within this state, it is autonomous in a stricter sense.

It is also recruited in the study of life and cognition and the way cognition is grounded in life by inactivist scholars, where it is related to a personal closure under precarious circumstances.

So it is something that is

able to operate and able to recreate the conditions in which it operates while there is no exogenous force that helps him do so.

For example, if you have a candle, it helps.

There is a burning fire which generates a flow of oxygen so as to maintain itself.

But if someone does not keep fuel going, this dies.

So this has no really way to recreate the conditions in which it operates.

This is in contrast to the simplest bacteria there is, which is able to look for food, basically.

So the inactive concept seeks to capture that.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Daniel, do you maybe want to read the quotes from the paper directly referring to intelligence and autonomy as described?


SPEAKER_00:
Intelligence is the general ability for a system to understand the world either in a reflexive propositional way or as enacted in their ecological activity.

And autonomy refers to the property of operational closure under precarious circumstance, i.e.

to the capability of biological systems to continuously maintain and recreate their own structural identity as a result of the collective activity of their constitutive processes.


SPEAKER_04:
Right.

And these are processes that are actively generating and sustaining identity.

And I think Avel spoke really well to operational closure in what you just described.

But we just want to refer anybody who's listening to this paper by Montavel and Masio in 2015, this biological organization as a closure of.

constraints, as closure of constraints.


SPEAKER_01:
So I want to emphasize that there is, I think it's pretty old, the operationalization.

It has at least 10 years, and the Motivoli paper is an attempt to formalize it in logics.

So it is not necessarily the reference on this.

I don't remember what is the reference paper on this.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

Maybe let's move on to embodied intelligence.

And Stephen, if you, this is perfect for you, if you want to read the quote from the paper describing what embodied intelligence refers to.


SPEAKER_02:
Yes, okay.

Embodied intelligence refers to the ability for understanding adaptation

It's a sort of mixture of both that is imprinted in an agent's physical structure rather than in some general computational ability.


SPEAKER_03:
Very nice.


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, that's significant.


SPEAKER_00:
And then we have the wood lice.

Alias, yeah.

Don't use the Jitsi chat, FYI.

You can use Keybase if you want a back channel.

But that's the wood lice example that Carl Friston provided in the 2018 example.

That's a little shout out there.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Yeah.

So does anybody want to say a few more words about embodied intelligence?

Maybe Avel or Steven, or if there's something that comes up for you guys, feel free to raise your hand if there's something else you want to discuss.

And the slides are the slides that we prepared, Avel, for the talk.

They're in the Keybase chat as well.


SPEAKER_02:
So I'll mention just to say, I mean, because we're kind of introducing it at this stage, I won't stop raising those and those are questions and we'll save that for the next one.

But the, and I just note that, um,

that this is useful just to highlight how this is being structured.

Because you've got this word intelligence and embodiment.

And I know there's talk about the brain or the idea of the brain and the idea of the mind.

So I think it's interesting here that this paper sort of bridges a bit across the brain, intelligence, mind, culture kind of

So when it's talking here, it kind of seems quite an open description and is really making sure it's clear to speak to the difference to this general computational ability and that it's somehow a different type of knowing that's being done.

Maybe with the word, you know, morphological computing sometimes is used in that world.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Thank you.

Maybe, Daniel, do you want to explain the free energy principle and active inference?


SPEAKER_00:
sure so as on the slide here the free energy principle states that dynamical systems given sufficiently regular boundary conditions which are required for their continued existence spontaneously self-organize so as to minimize their expected variational free energy through time effectively maximizing evidence for the world model they enact

so the expected variational free energy which we talk about in more detail elsewhere it's kind of like all aspects of the system through time are what have to be handled in order for persistence and using some technical formalisms that turns out to have equivalence with evidence for a generative model where one is persisting

Active inference explicitly brings action into that inference process, and it's the process by which dynamical systems maximize their evidence for the model of the world which they enact.

This can occur by a system altering its environment to fit expectations, i.e.

niche modification,

so it's the difference between the free energy principle merely saying that persistent systems are going to be isomorphic with those that have high evidence for the world model which they enact and then active inference as a corollary process theory says

And the way that they're going to do that is through inference, updating their internal model, or through action, which can be just sort of like a flock of birds, action in the sky, or it can be niche modification like StigmaG.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Thank you.

And then we can go on to thinking.

Oh, Stephen, you have a comment to say?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, just one piece here also sort of flags up for me is the use of the word model, because we talk about their own model of the world, and yet often we think of models as something that we've created in the world, you know, on a piece of paper and things like that.

So, again, there's a sort of ontological challenge in the sense that it is kind of like a self-model, but it's a self-model that's not a representation.

But our language is kind of couched in our history.

So anyway, I think that might be something that sort of resurfaces and have to kind of keep restating because people might have this representational kind of inbuilt

way of, you know, those metaphors are quite embedded.

So it's hard for people to necessarily switch to what it means to move away from representational approaches.


SPEAKER_00:
I have one question as well.

The reason why we're talking about active inference and free energy principle in this paper.

So, Evo, what does

active do for this paper?

Are there other contender theories in the game?

How else are people trying to take a unified approach to studying the specifics and the generalities of states?


SPEAKER_01:
So the the approach I have, I define as an active inference with the N between parentheses, it's a synthesis between what is said by activists and what is said back to transfer lists.

The core framework is inactive.

I'm interested in characterizing state societies as a network of constraints.

So as slow processes that exist at a holistic scale, not within individual, not between individual, but in some sense over individual.

and that shapes the activity of individuals so as to maintain itself.

That's the core argument.

Society is our organism.

But now, if I want to get there, I need some stronger sense.

If I need to get there, if I need to formalize the role of states, which are at core information processing machines, in it, I need to formalize in a stronger sense the relation between

basic synchronization, basic stalinization, and epistemic states.

And that is precisely what active inference does.

So I need the two.

I need inactive formalism, the inactive approach, and I need active inference formalism to make the link between the ecological activity of states as an inferential process and the body,

constraints that actually statistics consist in.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice, thank you.

We can, I guess, move on to thinking through other minds.

Steven, did you have a comment?


SPEAKER_02:
Just one other comment.

I was interested by the, you know, you're using the term constraints.

And in active inference, it's sometimes thought of as the higher level processes are in some ways constraining the behavior of lower level processes rather than necessarily dictating them.

So, you know, it's a little like I'm doing the faster jig and someone's just...

slowing me down a little bit um and so on so yeah just curious that that word constraints has brought in because often people think of you know intelligence is all about doing things and you know not constraining things so anyway just curious about that


SPEAKER_00:
Yep, that's related to synergetics.

Hawken, not Bucky, and about like a wave and a ripple.

Like the wave constrains where the ripple can go.

The faster fluctuations are constrained by the slower ordering parameters.

So here we have thinking through other minds, and this is another body of work, which we won't spend a ton of time on, but for organisms that are making generative models of their niche, sometimes that niche contains other organisms such as their self,

And it matters how those other organisms also include generative models of oneself.

So thinking through other minds is describing how in a shared epistemic niche, a shared informational niche with shared salience cues, for example, that two different agents are able to coordinate because they are thinking through each other's minds.

Like if I put up my hand, then Blue will think that I want to speak.

So it's sort of like a little bit of a theory of mind, but with more of a act-imp flavor.


SPEAKER_04:
So both the idea of constraint and this concept of thinking through other minds bring me back to Mike Levin's paper, The Computational Boundary of a Self.

because of the nested like cognitive cones, right?

And when he kind of talked about it, he talked about, you know, the higher order or like the larger level, the higher level organism or collective constrains the behavior of like the individual, like sub level collectives.

So that was kind of this idea of constraint.

And then also like thinking through other minds, like specifically we talked about,

how connections between cells, individuals, but, but connections that, that essentially breed information sharing.

So, so when you have like a shared informational niche that enables this, this process kind of, of thinking through other minds where you think more as a collective.

And so that expands the cognitive boundary of the self to then include other, you know, individuals within that cognitive boundary.

Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
yeah and that ties into the work of andy clark and uh the extended mind so there's a um so the way that that gets uh there's a there's a bit of um talk about how do you think about that extension happening and how much is it an extension of the individual and how much i suppose is what's being talked about here is how much does what has been extended start to become its own sort of cognitive agent


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

And maybe very appropriately, um, Avel has returned and we are moving on to talk about niche construction.

And I think, um, Avel might have a lot to say about the niche and its role in extending the cognitive boundary.

Um, so maybe do you want to give us a few, a few insights into, can we help us think through your mind?


SPEAKER_00:
Modify the audio-visual niche.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure what I could say about the niche.

Sorry?


SPEAKER_00:
Modify the audio-visual niche of our joint attention.


SPEAKER_01:
I'm not sure how I modify the niche.

I don't know.

Anyway, I can change your model of the niche, which is not what I'm going to do, I think.

I'm not trying to do that activity, at least.

Whatever.

so the there is body of work in biology evolutionary biology which is centered on how organisms modify their direct environments in a way that somehow fits their um their ecological needs so a typical example is how beavers will be dumb so as to get i i honestly don't know what beavers get out of them but they get something

and the basic arguments in the thinking through other minds framework is that the way you modify a niche has a cognitive value it's externalized expectations and by exercising expectations it allows expectations to synchronize between individuals and it's

There is a very clear analogy or identity between... Once you accept there is a cognitive value in niche construction as the externalization of expectations, there is a very clear analogy and even identity between niche construction and extended cognitions.

Beaver are just extending their cognition

their expectations the domain of the world that somehow participates to the fact that they um they live they keep on living and understanding their world so there is a pretty basic way in which an organism can expand the extent of the world the domain which is operationally closed and which participates actively in their maintenance

And this is basically what there is to be found in niche construction.

By shaping their niche, organism shapes their world.

They shape their condition.

They shape their body.

And I'm not sure.

I'm trying to give a general insight in niche construction and how it relates, but I'm not sure.

how relevant it is because I'm not sure what is the point that is to be made followingly.


SPEAKER_00:
just that niche construction is an important mechanism of extended cognition like the recent stigma g models show that individuals don't need to carry on board or internally the entire cognitive apparatus they only need to know how to interact and potentially modify a niche and then also i think this is important when we're talking about

cities and so on in states because our niche can as per thinking through other minds include other others like us or distant from us but also it includes the abiotic niche so climate change and resource utilization those are niche modifications there are some radioactive mountains that have been niche modified and so it it provides a continuity

between the kinds of ecological changes that humans make with the cognitive approach to ecosystems.

And so that's why it's a very rich framework to build off of.


SPEAKER_04:
So I just want to read this quote from the paper really quick and then, and then Steven will come to your comment.

So it says, as stated previously,

The network of constraints defining the structural identity of basic life needs not be printed in flesh.

It only needs to influence faster processes so as to continually recreate itself.

And the references for this are there on the slides if you care to probe further.

It says, such constraints can be embedded in the informationally rich sociocultural niche, which enable the human ecology by affording adaptive coordination and the development of complex skills.

And I think one of the main things that this paper does, and feel free to correct me if I'm wrong,

But it kind of takes the idea of cumulative cultural evolution and brings the niche into this as a cognitive extension.

So I think that's one of the key moves made here.


SPEAKER_01:
Basically, I know cultural evolution.

I have known cultural evolution for like five years or so, acting in France for one year only.

So cultural relationships, I see things.

And I'm currently writing a paper that could be interpreted on reductionism in cultural evolution.

And the fact is cumulative cultural evolution in cultural evolution is the replacements of low fitness variants by high fitness variants within variants, I mean, of cultural tokens that are implemented within minds or behavior, because there is not a strong ontology on what the replicator is in cultural evolution.

And a basic insight I want to convey is that culture does not stop in the brain.

Culture certainly does not stop in individuated cultural tokens.

And one of the goals of the paper is to show that social cultural evolution, it has a knowledge extension or intention, I don't know.

It exists not only within the minds of individuals and within the behavioral effects of cultural tokens.

It exists in structures that are not apprehensible by an individual and that are not entailed by any specific cultural token.

Hence the holism.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Thank you.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, also bringing that beaver example is, to some extent, a beaver constructs a dam.

And to some extent, maybe it grows a dam.

Maybe in the same, you know, so by adding pieces, it's growing something.

And at what point does it stand back and say, oh, that...

move that one a bit to the left move that a little bit to the right and sort of improve the construction and how much is it an evolving process um i suppose there's also the idea that once something has grown

and it's changed the niche, something else, you know, just like the brain effectively has to grow before it can do its thinking.

So maybe there's something about how these structures have grown and been constructed.

So I don't know.

I won't, I'm just mentioning that.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

I guess maybe we kind of got ahead of ourselves talking about niche modification and cultural evolution.

I love this picture because it really shows like kind of how much we have offloaded our cognitive selves into the niche environment.

Like we don't need to know how to use directions or what restaurants are good or we don't need to know actually any of that anymore because it's all like riding around with us in a smartphone in our pocket all the time.

So we've just put our brain, we've offloaded all of the cognitive capacity of our brain, or at least a good portion of it.

So what do we think about now?

It makes me think about that always.

It says in the paper, we claim that niche modification is critical for cumulative cultural evolution and advancements such as writing allow active inference to occur between agents and stigmatic cues embedded in the niche.

Avril?


SPEAKER_01:
Did I say what you, did I write what you just said?

Okay.

What I wanted to note is that what you described, the way we offload information on our social and environmental and technological environment is the classical collective brain picture, which is entailed by mostly Boyd, Richardson and Henrich modeling of relative cultural evolution.

What I want to show is that, to go a step beyond, we do not only have a self that is augmented by environmental cues, there is a self outside ourselves.

There is things that shape social life and that are not, there are agencies that shape social life and that is not human, that is institutional.

That's the step beyond the collective brain, the vanilla collective brain view, which is maybe an anti-collective brain.

There is actually such a thing as a collective brain.

It's not an image, and we can study it.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, we can study it now through Wikipedia and the internet, like our network of the collective brain.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, it's interesting as well in terms of we have all this extended information, but there's a very good book called The Paradox of Choice.

So the thing is we have all this information, but you still have to do an action policy on what to do.

And the challenge is you can have so many, you know, it's like going to the supermarket and, you know, you can buy 50 different types of olive oil.

It's just olive oil at the end of the day.

But now you've got to choose between 50 and you've got, you know, so there's a sense of abundance, but there's also a need for an action policy, which is, of course, what active inference talks about.

And ultimately, it's not the volume of information that's going to be the game.

It's the ability to act and in appropriate ways and make sense of how to be in your niche.

So that's kind of interesting.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

So we are going to move on.

We're going to go into the next section embodied intelligence in nested minds.

But But just to quickly summarize here, like what was the main brought up in the introduction.

So we've gone through the keywords.

But just to clearly just stated out autonomous systems are defined by a set of processes that create and sustain their identity.

They embody their understanding and adaptive abilities within their physical structure.

They enact a model of their world and seek to maximize evidence for this model through active inference, and they can maximize model evidence through modification of their niche.

So just to kind of sum up what an autonomous system is and where we are at this point.

And then we'll move on to discussing embodied intelligence in

nested minds.

Um, so a quote from the paper, it says, uh, here we argue that innovations are instead an emergent property of our species, cultural learning abilities applied within our societies and social networks, our societies and social networks act as collective brains.

We outline how many human brains, how many human brains, which evolved primarily for the acquisition of culture together, beget a collective brain.

Oh, this isn't actually from

from the Thinking Like a State paper.

This is from the Innovation in the Collective Brain paper.

And this framework, this collective brain framework, grounds the study of intelligence in the way that an organism maintains structural autonomy and allows the formal assessment of the collective brain hypothesis.

So the collective brain hypothesis has been put forward, but not formally assessed up until this point.

Avelle, do you want to talk a little bit more about that?

Because I probably just botched it.


SPEAKER_01:
About how the collective brain hypothesis is not formally assessed?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
So, in cultural evolution, you have... What I'd say is the dominant theory is gen-culture co-evaluation theory, which is basically centered on how we have cultural variants that have an adaptive role, and there are a set of cognitive bias

or cognitive mechanism, but actually cognitive bias, behavioral bias, actually, actually, that help us identify what are the most adaptive cultural variants.

And this has a feedback effect on gene selection, which has feedback effect on cultural selection.

And basically, all of our interpretation is entailed by a process of, a convolutional process between genetic and cultural

evolutionary information processes.

And the fact is, there are claims, there are numerous claims in the literature that there is some sort of collective computation that is entailed, or collective cognition that is entailed by this.

So there is, if I remember well, Henry Shenmuto Krishna, who wrote the innovation in the Creative Brain paper.

And there is, I think, Boyd and Smaldino,

Boyd, which is basically one of the two founders of the initial formalism, and Smaldino, which is one of the most computationally savvy members of the current literature, that wrote a paper on collective cognition, no, distributed computation, because revolution is distributed computation, I don't remember the exact title.

But it's

I want to accentuate it a lot, its words.

Like, they have a model of individual bias in selection, and they have a narrative interpretation of this, somehow entailing some kind of computation.

And there is nothing in between.

There is a few papers of less central actors that are interested in the co-evolution of social networks and cultural variants.

Axe and Smola, to name them.

There is

literally not one paper that explains how is this supposed to be cognition what are the mechanisms what is the cognitive architecture there is nothing right or it's marginal and i did not heard of it and

The goal of the paper is to basically explain how we can grant a view of cognitive mechanisms that are entailed by the social cultural networks and structural constraints that are embedded within a society.

And it's not a model because to build a full causal model of any brain or organism is not tractable.

But it's to prove that it's meaningful.

there is a positive way in which we can model societies as or at least process within societies as a collective form of cognition and a key example of this is the state because we have access to the mechanisms we have access to different papers with which they understand and predict and control reality awesome that's a perfect i think transition into the next slide do you want to read this first daniel


SPEAKER_00:
This paper uses the framework described to illustrate that the co-evolution of top-down control and cultural niche construction enabled the emergence of the city-state complex and how these collective organizations maintain structural autonomy.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

And so that's kind of the

The summary, I say, of the section, the embodied intelligence and nested minds section.

Does anybody want to give a thought?

Or we can go on to the next section.


SPEAKER_00:
Just what you just said about how we know the mechanism of the state.

We see its neurotransmitters and its action selection policies.

So it's like...

every system has advantages and disadvantages for its study.

This is one where many of the key features are designed.

And so it's a lot more like investigating the connections of a program that was written rather than the potentially like map territory debates over like, well, what is the bacteria really doing?

Are we really measuring the bacteria?

But it's like, we know how certain processes in the state happen, but not all of them.

And citizens usually don't know.


SPEAKER_04:
Sivan?


SPEAKER_02:
Following on to what Daniel said, a quick question in a way is how much you may be trying to have a realist approach on the idea of the brain or it being a brain or how much is it an instrumental tool or a metaphor?

I'd be curious as you take that correlation because you've got brain, you've got mind, you've got intelligence, you've got

extended cognition is it that you are really wanting to make it say there is like a brain that's kind of in enacting its own action policies or um so that'd be that might be helpful so i think actually like maybe we should hold that to the end section from the from the because i think we're going to get more into how is a city like a brain


SPEAKER_04:
As we get closer to the end of this contextualization.


SPEAKER_00:
We'll save it for dot one and dot two because we'll cover just the background here, but it's a very good question.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, very good.

It's going to provoke a lot of discussion.

So that's why I'm like, well, maybe we should get through the rest of the rest of the talk going on first.

So we're moving on now to the deep history of cities and states.

Here is another quote from the paper.

Stephen, do you want to read this for us?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Okay.

Cultural niche construction...

allowed humans to alter their socio-cognitive ecology in a way that allowed extensive functional specialization and the evolution of supra individual agency through mediating institutions.


SPEAKER_00:
That makes me think about the evolution of functional specialization in ant colonies.

And it's like, you can't have the super specialized task.

You know, you can't have somebody who specializes on just sourdough bread until there's somebody else who can help them with some other tasks.

And that's the economic inspiration for why they call that process in ants division of labor.

downstream of adam smith 1776 the economic division of labor and the candle maker and the shoemaker and all of that so once you have a lot of people living together they can specialize in a new way there are new institutions needed needed to mediate and that results in more being different i love how daniel like says ants and gets like giddy and excited uh stephen


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, and I noticed this term, supraindividual.

So there's kind of this, I suppose in the Ancona, you think of the queen, but in our world, we have these.

And actually, I've been thinking about a lot of this myself in terms of how we relate to these bigger scales.

So this idea of supraindividual or supracollective

ties into the idea of the state, you know, because, you know, we think of, you know, the word state is actually used literally in the United States to be, you know, a region.

But there is an idea that it's trying to maintain something.

So that term, I think, is a useful one to sort of pull out.

And it's super individual agency.

So that ties it into active inference in an interesting way.

It would be interesting to know the term socio-cognitive ecology.

It's not one I've heard before in quite that way.

So I don't know if that could be something just to maybe ground that term in this context.


SPEAKER_00:
Well, we can return to it.

And I added the book cover for Leviathan with the person made up of other people.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thank you.

So in this section of the paper, Avelle explains how state niche construction depended on serial monoculture, the technology of writing, material infrastructure, dense settlements, and engineering societies from the top down as documented in Seeing Like a State by Scott.

Avel, do you have a few maybe words to say about this?

I mean, more than the brief kind of overview I just gave.


SPEAKER_01:
So I'm not sure I identified a key subject like on the importance on the morphogenesis of states from a social scientific perspective.


SPEAKER_04:
Just rid of talking about state niche construction.

Like what did that depend on?


SPEAKER_01:
All of those things.

Basically, a state is, I think we could have a lot of definitions.

Durkheim says, I think it's Durkheim, it is said in certain senses that it is essentially a monopoly on legitimate violence.

So if there is a group of men that has weapons and that has the exclusive rights to use it, and that this right is probably accepted, it is a state.

uh i'm mostly interested in the mode of operation of a state so for me it's a chain of command basically it's an abusive systems that makes people do things uh so this those two definitions they entail um

the loss of human autonomy then tell that you have at least a subset of humans that are constrained to follow the laws laws that are uh extrinsically imposed so that's in clear deviation from what is done say in iroquois society where um at least by the partial accounts i have

mostly no one has the power to coerce anyone else and any decision is grounded on rational debates so this is not what a state is like a state is when you have a guy with the biggest bird and he can say okay you go kill this person because i want to i want this to happen and um you have a definition of the states that

Sorry.

You have definition of the state that is grounded in the sovereign.

I'm not sure when it initiates.

I think it's with Leviathan, which I did not read.

But it's basically that the state is a central actor that has power on anyone, which is... Sorry, I have chat things.

So state is something that has power on anyone, and it's not tied to a specific individual.

So that entails the capability for a set of foreign institutions or a set of individuals to basically coerce other people to do things.

And this entails, for example, at least enough authorization of resources for other people to not flee, or enough imbalance in wealth

for other people to get to you, even though they know it will strip them of their autonomy.

So it's a body grounding on which the literature, the anthropologic literature on state and state emergence is written.

And this entails agriculture, trade, a lot of ways for basically wealth to be centralized and powerful people to be able to constrain everyone else.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

And that speaks very well to how

States get a grip on their subjects and themselves.

And what is the common grounding maybe that is used to get a heterogeneous understanding of states?

Oh, sorry.

Emergency alert.


SPEAKER_00:
Your attention, please.

Your attention, please.

Update in action policy requested from the state.


SPEAKER_04:
Exactly, exactly.

So now states get a grip on us through like our cognitive offloading into the niche, right?

Stephen, did you want to say something?


SPEAKER_02:
Yeah, I mean, this also speaks to that challenge of being able to get a grip on things which are beyond the adjacent scale.

Like, you know, they're trying to get, you know, they have to use, they have these technologies that can reach out to everyone.

But at the same time, it's kind of, they can't easily get a grip on

So there's some interesting points there around, you know, because there's a few scales between us and the state, right?

And that's interesting.


SPEAKER_00:
And technological development, like...

little tiny chips that track where you move, that makes it a little easier to get a grip on where somebody is moving.

So it's a co-evolution with estates and technology, going back to agriculture and writing and ledgers.

And now we're in a new phase of ledgers from zero, one, two, three.


SPEAKER_03:
Nice.


SPEAKER_02:
Stephen?

Yeah, and of course, the challenge is that they get a grip on what you're doing, but their inference is about why you're doing it, decontextualized.

So they think someone's doing X or Y, and that may be wildly different.

They may be underestimating the risk, or they may be radically overestimating the risk of behavior.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

So I'm going to just flip through these next few slides.

So dense settlements, what the function of the dense settlement did was allowed for economic codependency.

And we talked earlier about the functional specialization that was like, you know, necessary for this economic codependency.

And it also facilitated the development of

nested social communities.

And Daniel wrote, is there a scaling relationship here?

And I think we have to wait and address that maybe in the dot one.

And moving on, it says enforcing state control over urban systems mandates building acceptance into the population.

And this is like, how do you let the state be in charge of you?

How do you grant grip to the state?

And this is the people must perceive competency in the authoritarian regime.

And there's a redistribution of wealth, like, for example, paying taxes.

And also symbolic legitimacy, which is achieved through the church, largely, or maybe there's other ways, but was in the early development of cities and states, largely religious-based.

So there's a lot of things that we've talked about that tie into formation of cities and states.

And it's large scale coordination, collective identity, crop redistribution, which I thought was interesting.

Like some people grow it, some people eat it, some people take it, some people sell it.

And then the functional specialization, specialized roles and the control of the money and the flow of the money.

So all these things together unify to give a state grip and allow this kind of top down control.

Is there any comments on that?

Or if not, we can move on to the next section.


SPEAKER_00:
Just that if those are the necessary and sufficient features when there's a crisis of competency or distribution of wealth or symbolic legitimacy, what does that forebode?


SPEAKER_04:
Avelle, do you have an answer?

I'm sure waiting and waiting in the wings.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, the answer is basically a structural demographic theory, which is a central result in clever dynamics, which basically states afford the possibility for the elites to ignore the social maintenance and just capture wealth.

And when they do too much, it causes political instabilities.

And this entails fluctuating

contributing cycles of integration and integration in states developments.

And by the way, we, in the sense of France, the US and likely global capitalism are in a phase of disintegration, which needs, which entails that we have a urgent need to understand how to organize outside or in spite of

a dominant institution and to understand where they come from.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

So we're going to move into the last section of the paper, which is from the urban metabolism to the collective mind.

And we're going to go back to the main question of the article, which was what kind of intelligence is displayed by city-state systems and how is it embodied within their structure?

And maybe Stephen, do you want to read this quote from the paper?


SPEAKER_02:
Yes.

Okay.

So answering this question in terms of inactive inference entails revisiting our accounts of the urbanization dynamics as the results of city-state systems actively managing to get a grip on their world, i.e.

minimize their expected variational free energy.


SPEAKER_04:
Cool.

And there are a couple more quotes from this section that we can move on to.

Daniel, do you want to read this first one here?


SPEAKER_00:
Basic autonomy is indeed formally defined as operational closure, or more precisely the capability of a network of constraints to canalize faster processes, like metabolic flows, into maintaining and recreating itself,

I like that.

It's kind of a twist on the Kantian organism concept, the teleological definition.

The organism is like the level it makes sense at.

And this takes a more operational and mechanistic approach towards closure of mechanism and constraints and autopoiesis rather than merely end-directedness, which doesn't immediately suggest a mechanism.

And then, since the material and sociocultural landscapes of urban systems canalize human activities so as to maintain itself, the process of urbanization clearly entails the constitution of cities as basic life.

Food comes in, waste goes out, city's alive.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

And I love this picture of like the elephant is the city.

Serval, did you want to say something?


SPEAKER_01:
I wanted to point out that the first point you made is that with the Montevil and Mossio definition, or my account of them, is a twist on the Kantian idea that organism is the level at which it makes sense.

And it's basically the movement that Montevideo and Moreno make because an activism at first it's surrounded in conceptual philosophy and terminology.

This is the grounding in which Varela and maybe Maturana articulated the view that cognition is in fact grounded in life.

And what

mostly people at the Basque Centre for Life Sciences, I think it's called, try to do is to mechanise it, to personalise it, to grind it into specific biochemical processes.

So you've precisely captured what this account is meant to do.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

And good job inferring, Daniel.

based on the stigmatic cues left in the niche.

And we can move on to a couple more quotes from the paper.

This is one that really resonated with me, and it's paraphrasing Jablanka and Lam in 2006.

This paper that's here, The Evolution of Information in the Major Transitions, says, a full-fledged evolutionary transition typically entails the emergence of new forms of information systems,

mediating regulation at the collective level and or the heritability of collective traits.

And then another quote from the paper is also taken from this Goudy and Kroll paper in 2014.

It says, the emergence of city-states with their professional classes and their mediating institutions based on writing technologies constitute a clear case of such a transition, especially in the case of the late agricultural civilizations.

And I totally get this.

And also it really speaks to how stigmergic cues left in the niche environment can contribute to the formation of our collective brain.

I mean, writing, like we can leave stigmergic cues for generations yet to follow.

And some writing in stone, right?

Like, so this is like, still we can read it many, many, many, many ages and generations later, which I thought that was really poignant.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_02:
One thing I'd be interested in, in terms of the state, is how much different

areas of society or the state are trying to achieve similar types of outcome so when there's um and when there's i mean we've just had that case of um that video of a cortez being murdered and you know so like within the state you have internal conflicts you know within within the state itself um but also

How much does the people at different scales have to be aligned?

Or how much will the state itself kind of do what states do, so to speak, as its own mind?


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Thanks.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I agree about not every single action in the state necessarily being the same.

Like if you looked at the body, you said, well, no, we're supposed to be making glucose.

Why are there cells that are breaking it down?

Or like there can be sections that are doing something

processes that seem directly opposite to each other but that can be part of a broader regulatory process so it brings into question you know what are the official processes versus the things that are in the gray zone of the state and how do we go from this model into more useful forms


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

Thanks.

And so we can move now to another quote from the paper that is from paraphrasing this paper that we actually just did in a recent live stream, How to Count Biological Minds by Matthew Sims.

And in the Thinking Like a State paper, it says, if the nested hierarchy of regulation systems enables adaptive behavior at the system scale,

it effectively enacts a collective mind, regardless of whether system components retain their cognitive ability.

And this speaks back to what we were saying earlier about the top level kind of constraining the lower levels.

Like maybe there's like a, once you contribute to the collective, then you've contributed to something greater than yourself and your own cognitive ability perhaps doesn't matter so much.

Any thoughts on that or we can move on to some more topics from the paper?

Daniel, do you want to read this quote?


SPEAKER_00:
The closest analog of our intuitive picture of a mind in urban systems is their most disembodied mechanism for adaptive regulation, administration.

Indeed, just like neuronal cognition, it entails the top-down regulation by a specialized population with the help of a specific purpose information system.

Makes me think about those tubes that they used to put the physical packages in and send them, and now there's special information channels, but...

You better be listening when that channel calls.


SPEAKER_04:
So that's like Futurama.

Like they have like, I mean, the bureaucracy, like the administration.

And I mean, administration, I love this quote from the paper.

I do think like administration is totally like disembodied from like reality and bureaucracy is like so imposing.

But like in the Futurama, they all have like, you know, it's like space age, modern transmission.

Like you could just click DocuSign on the internet.

And like, yet they're using like tubes literally like to send the things off.

And it takes seven years to get approval or something ridiculous like that.

But like, it does work like that, right?

Bureaucracy is kind of crazy.

This next quote says, the institution of state sponsored legal codes affords a way to directly transcribe administrative expectations in

into individual minds.

Rule of law is therefore a core tool by which states create their world through building the basis of their own intelligent behavior into their sociocultural niche.

And this is brilliant, right?

Like just yesterday, my landlord called the codes officer because my neighbors have weeds, right?

Like I know they're not allowed to have weeds.

It's beyond the expectation of like, you know, our neighborhood that nobody has weeds.

And everyone knows that this is the expectation.

Some people don't maintain their weeds and we all have the right and duty and obligation to impose that on our niche environment.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
So the expectations, the normative expectations, a lot of laws are like, you know, it shall be within two weeks after this giving notice that this happens.

So they're expectations and then they're called codes.

And so it made me think about predictive coding.

it's like we can predict that this technology is going to be used this way so i know it's not exactly what people mean with the neural rate codes etc with predictive processing predictive coding but laws are normative they're saying what should happen and that helps behave as expected you want to be on the right side of the road driving in the us so that's like

an expectation, and then it becomes an intersubjective preference that is sponsored by the state.

So it just kind of cool, again, showing points of contact between people's day-to-day life and their intuitive explanations for how these systems work.

And then it's like, yes, we have an ontology that picks up right with you and then goes a little further than you might've expected too.


SPEAKER_04:
Awesome.

Serval?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, that's exactly the idea, the idealization of expectations.

The fact that they are normative is, I think, accidental.

It's epiphenomenal to their core role, which is to shape behavior.

You have a project in studies, I don't know how you call that, which is called, I think, homo juridicus or homo legalis or some closely associated formulation.

behavioral approach to know.

And we need to do that more.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, sounds good.

So we just have some summary quotes maybe from the paper and to kind of summarize the ideas that were presented here.

Daniel, do you want to read one or some of these?


SPEAKER_00:
Okay, I'm just picking which one I would want to read.

I think the second one is a lot like what we were just talking about with the state defining expectations and then modifying its own niche, that operational closure to implement those expectations lest it dissolve.

Then I like this top quote, our notion of intelligence is based upon active inference, a scale-free framework applying to any system with individuated boundary states.

And then it's like, even the word state is a pun, as Avel pointed out before, état being state in French.

And we talk about internal, external blanket states, boundary states.

That sounds like it's gonna be at the boundary of the empire.

And then this is what it looks like to apply active inference to a real system, to go from a sort of Bayesian graph boundary notion to being like, well, what if that boundary state country was intermediating and insulating between these other two?

So I like how even the word state


SPEAKER_04:
comes into play i like that i i really like that too and i like that like that that's kind of a play on um like the friston particular physics like specific particular physics but also like physics as related to a particle um and and the idea of a state actually something when i was proofreading this paper was like you know i know that you're talking about like city states but it's not immediately obvious to the reader that like you might want to say like city states to kind of

flesh that out like from the get-go because it is, it can be such a play on word, right?

It's a boundary state.

It's a blanket state.

It's an active state.

It's a city state.

Daniel?


SPEAKER_00:
Maybe one other thing we can talk about in the dot one and two is states as we know them

And so it's only been a few generations.

Like you're a great, great, great grandparents.

That's a long time ago.

It's a lot of tacos ago, but it's a blink of the eye in terms of evolution and in terms of deep history.

And so even pre-Westphalia, that was not so long ago and there's so many world traditions.

And so just realizing that we're in a very non-stationary moment

with the development and the implementation of states, it's really important because it can be easy to be like, oh, it's a grind, all the states in the UN and 50 states in the US.

It's like even 70 years ago, there weren't that many states in the US and there was different countries in the world.

So things are changing.

It just sometimes it's at a different timescale, which makes sense because they're bigger and slower entities than we are.

Serval?


SPEAKER_01:
I want to point out two things.

First, the pun is not intended, but no, I will claim it is, and no one will check.

The second is that the received view is that states emerge with agriculture.

It is what Godi and Kroll said in the paper I cited.

It is not accurate, or we don't know whether it's accurate.

You have a pretty good single review of the literature of the

And the fact is, we do not know what human societies were like before written history.

We do not know.

And most importantly, it's something Greber and Wengro, two leading anthropologists in historical anthropology, like to rave about.

there are kinds of organizations that are authoritarian, there are kinds of organizations that are not.

So even if we are signs of, I don't know, great ritual states or anything, we don't know whether those kind of organizations were like what we know today because Western nation states are extreme in kind of extractive and coercive behavior.

They are shaped by war within Europe and between Europe and

colonialized countries.

So I much prefer to ground the history in which I talk in European history, in modern history, after Westphalia, after the birth or in the roots of the birth of the national states.

because it's pretty hard to talk about the roots of Sumerian states.

We need to do so because those are states.

We need to do so if we want to talk about what states are.

But if you want to talk about what our states are, we need to go in Westphalia.

We need not to go in Sumer or Egypt or whatever.


SPEAKER_04:
So just to kind of play off of that extractive and corrosive behavior,

and that states are often born out of war, um, something that you mentioned in the paper, but, um, I, I don't think maybe it gets enough, um,

attention is the concept of shared identity.

Because in this shared identity, that's what makes us faction off into our own state.

We're going to divide and become something new.

And Daniel was saying how we have so many states now, so many more states than we've ever had before.

And this factionalism, and we all have this distinct identity,

Is this going to breed more war or is every state going to become so small because they'll just faction and keep dividing?

I mean, you can get something, the most homogenous human culture you can imagine, and they will find something to divide them.

So, so is this good?

Is it bad?

If we keep dividing, is it going to be like a homogenous, like bunch of sub factions or is it just going to lead to like more division and more war?


SPEAKER_01:
um if i discuss that it will take a lot of time uh i understood this session was we are much off track definitely we'll save it for the dot one um okay


SPEAKER_04:
So moving on, the collective mind does not directly emerge from inter-individual interactions, but from slower evolving dynamical constraints which supervene on but do not reduce to human activity.

Therefore, the proper scale of analysis of collective cognition is an integrated activity of entire urban systems and should more specifically be grounded in the broader processes by which they maintain and reproduce their structural identity.

understood as an operationally closed set of constraints underlying their metabolic, cognitive, and ecological activity.


SPEAKER_00:
You know, replace urban with brain-body.

Just you could say the same exact thing.

The brain and the body have to be an integrated unit.

Finally, Blue, what does it mean to think like a state?

I'm going to put your overlay over the video so it'll look like you're a state.

Go for it.


SPEAKER_04:
The cognitive activity of states is defined mechanically by the standardized administrative systems they use to understand and manipulate their world, and functionally by their drive to build and enact grip over the material and sociocultural niche.

So there it is, the question, the answer.

We made it through from A to Z.


SPEAKER_00:
And I like, it's not, what is it like to be a state?

It's not the Nagel 54.

What is it like to be a bat?

This is more of a cognitivist interpretation that helps us actually potentially find useful ways.

You know, like I don't want to do a, you know, in X country, you grip the state.

People can kind of write their own jokes on that theme.


SPEAKER_04:
Nice.

And we can just think about what maybe these questions lead to, maybe what a good understanding of this work might enable.

Avel mentioned earlier the necessity for this understanding because of the kind of divided space that we're in right now.

What are the next steps for the FEP and active inference?

What are the goals?

What are you still curious about?

If you want to participate in either of the discussion videos, get in touch with us.

We would love to have you on to talk about these ideas in more detail.

Do you guys have any closing thoughts?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, just in dot one, let's dive in and open some threads, take some notes.

In dot two, let's see where we go.

Maybe somebody would like to pick up on one of those threads or apply one of these ideas and say, oh, I was working on a history of my region.

And so I want to see how I can apply that.

So we applied active inference to get thinking like a state.

And then how do we apply thinking like a state?

for something else, whatever it is that somebody is interested in seeing.


SPEAKER_04:
Avel, thank you for coming and kind of guiding us through our contextualization video.

It's always a pleasure.

Do you want to have the final word?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't have anything smart to say still.

Yes, but these are the words.


SPEAKER_04:
The paper does speak for itself quite brilliantly.

I will say.


SPEAKER_00:
All right.

Authors who come on dot zero are the best.

No, it's all good.

Thanks for joining blue and facilitating.

See you later.

And thanks also to Steven.

So hope to see you all in a dot one with a dot two or beyond.

So bye.


SPEAKER_04:
Bye.

## LQuXltGQ8Xk

SPEAKER_05:
all right hello everyone welcome to actinflab live stream number 33.1 it's november 23rd 2021 welcome to the actinflab

first-time participants and returning participants and listeners.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived live stream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome here, and we'll be following good video etiquette for live streams.

We are in the final two weeks of November 21 discussing thinking like a state paper of choice.

And we have some tentative paper selections for number 34 and likely we'll take a break and start with 35 in the beginning of January 22.

but we're really looking forward to an exciting 2022.

So if you have any ideas for people to invite for other streams, or if you yourself would like to join, then just let us know.

Today in ActiveStream number 33.1, we're going to be learning and discussing this very cool paper, Thinking Like a State, Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of Our Collective Minds, by Avel, aka Serval, Gwen, and Karlu.

And it's just a discussion video, even though we have the author on the stream, which is awesome.

We're pretty much in the dot one, going to...

go over anything that we want to we can return to some keywords and bigger questions that we raised in the dot zero we can add notes for next steps for questions to think about over the coming week to touch on again in the dot two or possible ways somebody could continue this avenue of research and we will be discussing this paper in next week 33.2

Okay, we'll go around and introduce our panel today.

Everyone can give just a short check-in.

They can say hello and something that they remembered from the paper or something that they were excited about to discuss and then pass it to someone who hasn't spoken and then we'll

conclude with the author.

So I'll start.

I'm Daniel.

I'm in California.

And just as we were discussing right before we started, I want to explore this aspect of states as anticipatory cognizers, not just reactive cognizers.

And I'll pass it to Dean.


SPEAKER_06:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm in British Columbia and ensconced in a cedar box today out in my cabin.

And I like the paper because I want to see whether or not there are parallels between what happens on an individual level and what happens on more organized levels of individuals.

And I'll pass it over to Blue.


SPEAKER_02:
Good morning, or good whatever time of day it is in your world, everyone.

I'm Blue Knight.

I'm an independent research consultant in New Mexico.

And I like this paper for many reasons, but my favorite reason is the scale-free aspect of

self-assembly.

So it's self-assembly at a much larger scale than I'm used to.

I normally study cells and subcellular organizations.

So I like how active inference unites the things that I like to study with statehood and larger scale organizations.

And I will pass it over to first-time participant Andy.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello, everybody.

My name is Andy.

I'm in Richmond, Virginia.

I'm very interested in

looking at the mechanics of how intelligence works through a collective.

Are there universal things that we can just the movement of information through relatively closed systems and how to modify that, the cognition that goes along with it.

Now we'll pass it along to Stephen.


SPEAKER_00:
Hello and good morning.

Stephen here in Toronto.

Yeah, I'm interested in this paper in terms of the scale, the social impact of looking at states and how active inference scales up and also maybe a little bit provocation in terms of like how much are we looking at the dynamic states of organisms or macro organisms and how much are we looking at the state of a dead set of artefacts that helps us

work with our niche and the scale of working with macro artifacts in a niche as much as macro cognitive agents.

So I'd be interested about that.

And I'll pass it, I believe, to Daniel.


SPEAKER_05:
you steven um i think we've all we non-authors have gone so serval would be awesome just to kind of recap uh hello and what brought you to writing this paper as we kick off the discussion so hello my name is uh i'm training physics epistemology uh weird things and uh what interested


SPEAKER_01:
with this paper is to show that if we accept a naturalist understanding of cognition, which is saying that it is based on actual systems, actual dynamics, then we can't resist the conclusion that social systems are organized in a way that is cognitive.

And I found this basic consideration pretty important because then there are no limits, like systems that are cognitive work in the way they are structured to work.

and we can change things and we can understand how change will affect how things behave, which is pretty urgent because I think

it's pretty likely that the nation-state systems that is dominant today, nation-state capitalism system, is dying and is basically bringing us with it.

So we have to explore the state of alternatives pretty quickly and efficiently.

And this needs a reflective understanding on what the state space is.


SPEAKER_05:
Great.

And I think it's a...

a pun or homonym that will return many times what are the states because we talk about partitionings of states a lot in active inference internal blanket external nested systems and now we're talking about the nation states so um

how are social systems cognitive?

We use that state-based partitioning to talk about other cognitive systems, ones that are designed or evolved.

And so we're applying active inference to study the cognitive properties of states.

Stephen, and then anyone else, and I'll just keep on adding notes or questions and people can look at it or suggest things in live chat.

Go ahead, Stephen.

Thank you.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think it's also cool with active inference is that kind of ontological challenge whereby we're dealing with non-equilibrium dynamical states in a non-linear system which gives rise to pullback attractors which have this non-equilibrium steady state quality where however often states are

or say we think in quantum theory or something, you know, they're like, it goes from this particular state to that particular state.

Right.

And so, um, there's, there's also that, um, interpretation of what can be done with states when you start to have nonlinear dynamics at play.

Thanks blue.


SPEAKER_02:
So something that I've mentioned in the .Zero video that I'm interested in maybe exploring a little bit deeper is like, what do states aggregate into?

So what is like the grander scale if we're all just self-assembling into something and the quantity of states that are produced?

I can't remember who said it, maybe it was Avelle, that states like arise as a result of war.

and um faction and division and so as we are progressing forward in time there's an increased amount of faction and division and like it doesn't matter how homogeneous a population is they will find something to divide about and so like this creates more city states within city states within city states so is there some kind of equilibrium like a tractor space for like the optimal number of states or is it all going to be like unified or is it all going to be dissolved at some point


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks, Stephen.

That's actually a good point there, Blue.

There's also something interesting about democracy.

They say that for democracy to work, it almost has to be a split of around 45 to 50 between different opinioned parties.

Otherwise, if basically one party is supported by 65, 70% of the people,

Generally speaking, it doesn't work very well because then there's no dynamic, I suppose, to move backwards and forwards.

So I think that's quite interesting.


SPEAKER_02:
So when we talk about the minimum number of states or entities to exist for democracy to function opinions,

It's interesting, you know, in the system that Mike Levin works with back from our July live stream, the computational boundary of a self, he works in planaria, which are regenerating organisms.

But you have to have a minimum number of cells and particularly like a minimum number of stem cells.

So I think it's like a thousand cells at base and like 120 planarian stem cells or you don't get regeneration.

And so like what kind of dynamic is required or how many people, and even for like, you talk about hunter-gatherer organizations, like 50 to 500 people they think made like an optimal hunter-gatherer colony, like less than 50 and you're gonna be eaten by coyotes or whatever.

So where is that optimal number in statehood?

What does that look like?


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, what aspects of the system are necessary, sufficient, incompatible, at odds with?

certain kinds of regimes of state.

And it is really funny how we talk about policy selection.

Policy sounds like it'd be more from international policy than it would be from reaching for your cup of water.

And then we talk about regimes of attention.

Usually people hear regime, they're thinking some historical regime of a state.

Whereas regime of attention doesn't necessarily carry that connotation.

So linguistically, there's a lot of contact points.

And that's why I think it was an awesome contribution by Serval was to just draw those out, ground it in the physics of critical systems and of cognitive systems.

And that's what is contributing to hopefully some of the ways we'll explore it's going to be used going forward.

So Dean and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, this might sound like pushback or challenge or whatever, but it's just I have a personal issue with the entire idea of scale-free, like that there's some sort of invariance across scales.

And I think that like when we see, for example, a lowercase a morph into an uppercase A,

even though they are of the same categorical type and fit in the same place in the alphabet, there is a change that goes on and so there is a scale variance aspect to this that I think... So again, this is my sense of it as opposed to sort of the agreed sense that there's a scale-free process in play.

The other thing I would wonder a little bit about is

When we take a constructivist view, a city as built, I'm not sure what happens to the bidirectionality that Active Inference affords.

So, again, I'm not saying that we can't find qualities in both, but I'm not sure that a city as a reflection of something constructivist is necessarily how living things reflect and predict.

But again, I'm open to having my mind changed.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen, and then I'll have a comment on the constructivism.


SPEAKER_00:
I was just also think it's a good point we blew about the Mike Levin's work and the question of how things are scaling up and of course the big thing that Mike Levin did mention that you know they've got these quite a lot of ideas around how things grow multiply and relate but no idea how they stop and that's kind of also interesting in terms of you know when we think about scale it's like

Has the organism reached its point because the top scale, the maximum scale, has kind of been reached?

Or is there some sort of, is it that it's the dynamics at a mid-scale, which is like an action scale?

So it's not that it's ever arrived at its thing, it's just arrived at its meso-action policy landscape,

which is available and you know is that availability then understood from what's inside or is it something that's checked to something external in the environment so that that i think is an interesting question


SPEAKER_05:
thank you um capitalizations yeah you have to the state capital capital punishment there's so many um other funny word plays but to the constructivist comment so um

one sort of simple constructivism would be like i mean there weren't bricks there and now there are so the city was constructed and now it's the scaffold for us to interact in so you asked dean where's that bi-directionality so i think there's a few ways to talk about the bi-directionality so first is niche construction

be a symmetric relationship we talk about the agent modifying the niche and the niche is modifying the agent and so it's like you have the blanket as the interface and then there are action and inference on both sides of the blanket being used as an as an interface and so it's more like a co-constructionism

But if, you know, Lego set A is building B while B is building A, that starts looking more like interactionism because it's not just instructions, put the brick here.

It's a specification of a protocol and an interface for interaction.

And that's what opens the door to improvisation and to other kinds of dynamics that aren't just simply like assembly of the 3D printer.

And then the other point, and then Dean, is it reminds me of Dennett's

1995 book, Darwin's Dangerous Idea, where he talks about basically two ways that you can talk about the appearance of design in natural systems, which are cranes and sky hooks.

And so if you look at a skyscraper, you think, how could that have appeared?

One approach is they built a crane to put that last top piece on.

And if that crane was too big to construct, then a smaller crane built that crane.

So you can have a cranes all the way down, like small things were built and scaffolds were in place that were removed later to result in this skyscraper.

Or you can just cut the knot and just say, well, maybe there was a skyhook and they just latched it to the sky and then built it down.

So that's like top-down constructivism appeals to skyhook technology, whereas bottom-up emergent process-based co-constructivism appeals

is more of a crane based approach so i think that's a very good point how even with constructivism we can still retain a lot of the important aspects of constructivism like physical construction but we don't need to fall into a uni-directional um or a top-down trap so dean what do you think about that and then stephen or anyone else


SPEAKER_06:
I think the important point, Daniel, is what you just mentioned, which is the trap of prematurely collapsing to the top-down privilege.

For example, if you go just outside of Denver, you end up in a place called Red Rocks, and then the question becomes, did somebody enact Red Rocks because they put a stage at the base of an amphitheater, or did Red Rocks enact

everybody who was attracted to that place and so all i'm basically suggesting is is is when we look at how things are constructed we don't want to lose sight of the fact that sometimes things construct us as well so the skyhooks aspect of it thank you dean stephen


SPEAKER_00:
And also, I mean, cranes and sky hooks, it gives that idea of how it links in.

They're also dead items, right?

So they're both tools or they're both objects.

And we can bring in sky hooks, which might be informational instructions, or cranes, which are places to carry the bricks that are going to build things.

But I think that when we talk about that Markov blanket and what goes both ways is...

yes i think when we're dealing particularly with dead things like bricks and that we construct an environment now it's a bit more complicated when we impact an environment that also grows and changes and is alive however when something comes back the other way from the environment is it constructing us or is it scarring us or is it giving us lots of little punches in the gut in which we heal so i'm wondering whether the other direction

It can't construct us, but what don't kill us makes us stronger type of thing.

Thanks, Steven.


SPEAKER_05:
Um, Andy, please.


SPEAKER_04:
Dean, I think in the context of cognition and the state, the specific, um, the element that's missing, right.

Is what's the relationship between the nation and the state, right.

So the nation would be the bottom up information or the bottom up cognition and the state could be theorized now as the top down.

And then broadly speaking, right?

The nation creates the state, the state, the existence of the state changes to circumstance.

The changes in circumstance forces the nation, the nation, the people to rethink how they're operating in the world around them because their circumstances have been modified.

And now you have this constant bi-directional relationship between bottom up and top down.

in the context of state versus nation and modifying circumstance over time.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Luke?

Dean, go ahead.

Yeah, Dean.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, Andy, I like what you're saying, except it's already collapsed to an A to B relationship.

And I think what active inference allows for is to keep things up on a generalized, abstracted level.

It doesn't have to be, here's the nation A and here's the people B. That's the difference, essentially, is if you want it to be an A and B thing, go ahead.

That's good for argument's sake.

But in fact, what active inference does is it keeps one side of this open.

and not necessarily specific it keeps it in order to be predictable it asks the counterfactual what if as opposed to having that pre-presented as the relationship and it's new it's a new type of relationship that's arising and i think that's right explored in the paper in the deep history


SPEAKER_05:
section there's really the specifics there's the minute particulars of the specific states that we have and typified by West Falia and a bunch of other historical events that the specifics matter we're in a complex system the trajectory really does matter blue


SPEAKER_02:
So I totally forgot what I was going to say.

But I would like to maybe challenge Andy.

What is the difference between the nation and the state?

Is the nation the people that make up the state, and then the state is the collective of the people?

Is it like a part-whole concept, or are they two separate larger entities, and people make up both?


SPEAKER_04:
So words

depending on which definitions you go with, it gets a little bit squishy.

In the context that I use them, state is a construct.

The political organization of a people is downstream of the shared identity of the people, of a people.

So the nation would be broadly the largest sense of shared self distributed among a relatively closed system in this regard, and the state being the construct by which these people organize their affairs inside of

their nation.

That's a relatively new idea, right?

The idea of a nation and the nation-state is relatively new as far as an overt construction.

Beforehand, in the age of absolute monarchy, there was no separation between the state and the people, right?

It was all embodied in the person of the sovereign.

So, different historical contexts, different periods of time, different cultural contexts now, you might get different definitions, but in the

The way in which I was using it, the state would be a policy requirement of the culture in which it was born, right?

It's why American democracy functions significantly better than South Sudanese democracy, even though they have literally the exact same institutions.


SPEAKER_02:
So Daniel, maybe you want to flip to slide 33, I think.

Like, where we, like, kind of show in the paper all of the, like, things that go into, like, the production of a state.

And so, like, I'm curious as to, like, where nation fits into this.

Is it, like, in the collective identity?

Or is it, like, a relationship between, like, nation and collective identity?

Or just what your thoughts are on that?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, absolutely.

Collective identity to me would be the definition of a nation.

Shared sense of self.

Everything else are things that you may or may not need a state to accomplish that may or may not be more efficiently conducted in the auspices of a state.

Control the monetary flow, you probably need something as sophisticated as a state, but to transfer resources back and forth, you don't.

You can grow grain and you can trade it for meat.


SPEAKER_05:
Go ahead.

Just the collective identity I'm just thinking about in organism and the liver and the bone cell.

It's like collective identity doesn't mean identical phenotype.

And so it makes me think of a cultural memory where each person, maybe there's a few touchstones that 80% of people know about.

Increasingly though, there's less and less shared information amidst

the informational changes that are happening.

So what does that mean when everyone's only gonna have a little partial facet of the collective memory on board, but maybe they can enact broader processes that are truly collective?

So how do we respect differences and shared aspects across multiple levels?

So Blue and Dean, and then Serval, I wanna hear what you're thinking about this.


SPEAKER_02:
So just like Daniel, how you were talking about like the bone and the liver cells, like making up an organism, you know, I think that that speaks here to what's the specialized roles and like the density of settlements enables that like functional specialization and

like you can have a blacksmith and a shoemaker and a farmer and everybody takes on their own little role and then goods can be redistributed.

So it just like reminded me of that and like that functional specialization and the importance of it.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Blue.

Dean, and then Serval or Pass.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, when I was watching the 33.0 and I saw this slide, thank you, Blue, for asking for it to be...

brought back again here.

This is again, a specific to a specific, because it's historical and it's reflective.

And the fact that we can look at things and say, this is what happened, we can look back on them.

I'm not sure we want to necessarily conflate that with active inference, which is about the recursion.

So, this is what happened.

We can see how things moved across a timeline from point A to point B, a city-state evolved.

But is that recursion, which is what active entrance is about, which is variation upon variation.

I'm not, again, I ask, is that recursion?

I know how we can diagram it and represent it, but is that representative of what actually occurs in recursion when certain thresholds appear and then just as quickly disappear?


SPEAKER_05:
Interesting.

So, Serval, if you'd like to add anything, and then Stephen.

so there are a lot of threads that were opened what are you asking my opinion about um i think part would be just uh on nation and state similarities differences um what is and what if and then more on this sort of integration slide where does active inference come into this tying of the knot how does active in france uh about nation i don't think it does


SPEAKER_01:
A nation is simply a collective identity that is related to a political entity.

It's a community of peers that happen to have some stakes and power over the behaviour of an institution, that is a state.

And the fact is that nations are not universal.

You have a lot of states that are not nation-states, that are not related to a community of peers.

For example,

the Roman Empire.

It was an empire, which means that you have people who get the power that form a group that is the Roman, and you have all the rest of the people that exist in there

that also are ruled by the empire that is dominated by the Romans.

So you do not have a community of interests that is related to a state.

You have an ethnic group that dominates other ethnic groups through a state.

Nations are not... They are not invariant aspects of what a state is.

However, they are...

collective identity, or at least ways to build boundaries between an in-group and an out-group, they seem to be an invariance of efficient human collective action according to Ostrom's principles.

So, there may be more tendency to build nations, to build nation-states, when you have more important between-group selection.

And

It is said that, I don't know of any computational quantitative work that suggests it, but it is said that modern Europe is pretty extreme in terms of between-group conflicts of war.

Because the diamond agreement is that the geography basically enables trade at great scales, but prevents the constitution of an empire in Europe.

Historically, there were a lot of states in Europe as compared as, say, in China, where you have a big state that is, I don't know, in terms of surfaces, maybe two or three times like Western Europe is, and more integrated than what you can have in South America because of the mountains.

So you have a pretty ideal regime to get a lot of intergroup conflicts and to get a selection regime that favors nations, organic nations that somehow collate with states.

And that's what happened to be instituted through, I don't know, Westphalia, the French Revolution.

I don't know the story of that.

There are a lot of pathways in Europe.

but in Europe you've got national states that originated, you've got pretty aggressive kinds of imperialism that originated, and both can be traced, I think, to an intense regime of selection of war.

And you have reasons that tend to say that war explains, in the sense, predicts more political complexity, which is

uh a debatable construct that basically maps this kind of integration of a society so the uh

History of Europe, of modern Europe specifically, and medieval Europe and everything past the Roman Empire, would have selected for both nations and aggressive kinds of imperialism.

And this is the kind of organization we get to live in now.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Serval.

Just like the ecological regularities through evolutionary time scaffold the evolution of an organism's cognition,

This is a transposition of that argument to the biogeographical and contextual and ecological factors that give rise to and scaffold the development of states as things, as cognitive entities.

There are some parallels there.

So it's an awesome point.

Thank you.

Blue, and then Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
There is a pretty important thing to say, that is, a state does not actually correspond to a nation.

Maybe states have original nations, maybe they are associated to nations now, but a state need not entail a nation.

You can have a state of a specialist in the cultural population, you can have a state, well, that's kind of the usual deal, actually.

A nation is a collective identity in a community of interest.

A state is a control system built from administration and it can be and often is captured by an elite that is ethnically, socially and in terms of cultural norms, pretty distinct from the people it controls.


SPEAKER_05:
Chicken and the egg.

Egg as the secreted state.

Chicken as the life form.

But then there's a co-evolution.

So that paradox stands there too.

Blue, Stephen, and Andy.


SPEAKER_02:
I'm going to defer and come back around to my idea.

So Stephen, and then Andy.


SPEAKER_00:
I think the whole scale question is very interesting here.

where it sort of, so often, I mean, in the European Union, you've got the European Union, it's kind of a reunion of pluralistic partners is the idea.

And you've got this tension where one side is basically saying, no, you're not, you're a state.

And we want to be a nation, an independent nation.

There's this tension, right?

Between, no, we're a union, we're a union.

And when actions are working, that works, the union, right?

And so I think that there's a scale where people try and work at.

And the rate at which people work at, what's the dynamics of people...

In the same way that when you have, politics seems to have a very slow trajectory.

You know, things shift, you have the state, you have your identity of your party.

However, nearer an election, a week, this phrase is a week is a long time in politics, and it is near an election.

The dynamics start to become much faster.

things can change much quicker.

So this scale question, again, comes in is what is a unit of identity?

How does it manifest at different rates?

And just one other thing in terms of identity is in participatory community-based action research,

They talk about community as actually a unit of identity.

It's almost like there's so many different types of fluidity at the community level and overlaps between communities that it becomes a unit of identity to actually work with in measuring stuff.

We tend not to do that at the higher level of the nation.

It's just the flag is a unit of identity.

It's a very, which hasn't maybe changed in a hundred years.

So it's an interesting, um, as well as the, you know, what, how much can things change and how much of the ability things to change caught up in the artifacts that embody them.


SPEAKER_05:
The artifacts that constitute them in some case.

So Andy, any comments or to blue?


SPEAKER_04:
Yes.

Thank you.

Um, so.

I was going to, well, let's go with what you just said, right?

Smallest element of action in this context.

Identity is the smallest element of action.

However, it is guided or bounded, right, by its ability to affect change.

So if you deeply identify with one other person in this world, the two of you are the small that you have.

Identity becomes basically shorthand for interest.

We two people, by calling ourselves a group, have a certain worldview and a certain desire to see our interests achieved.

We have the capacity of two people to accomplish that.

So what is our ability to affect change at that scale?

Relatively small once you're talking about anything larger than interpersonal relationships, right?

But it doesn't change the fact that your identity is shorthand for your interests and that we all, at whatever level or scale we're operating at, are pursuing our interests to the best of our abilities.

bounded by relative power.

But this idea of nation versus statehood, Serval, you're absolutely right.

The state is a thing independent of a nation.

Sometimes they correspond, and typically we say that that's a good fit, because otherwise it's an empire.

Otherwise it is somebody else's ideas of what constitutes right or wrong in terms of projected values or institutionalized values.

that are now imposed on you because the state is not representative of your cultural worldview or your shared identity.

It is something provided to you by somebody else's in the form of empire.

But the question that I had, right, going through the slides, there was this idea that the state as a top-down hierarchical control system, what is then nation or what is then identity?

How does that function in the sharing of information and cognition relative to the state?


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for the text-driven question.

It was a core argument of the article, just to quote, that states can be and should be understood as hierarchical control systems.

So, Avel, if you want to give a direct response, otherwise, Dean in blue.


SPEAKER_01:
So there is a great response, which is that to talk of hierarchical control system is basically to talk of top-down control.

This is, I think I've reframed the same point, the same thing, in saying those both words.

And of course, there is no cognitive system that is pure top-down.

Well, there are, they do not work.

They live in labs and they are not useful.

uh so basically uh the organic uh organization of whoever happens to have a say in what the state is is the at least the ascending dynamics in the collective brain they are what affects uh in bias in terms what uh change the priors and the policies etc etc so in the case where you have a defined nation a defined entry group

that happens to control the state, which I'd say is exceptional from what I've read.

You can't say that there is a meaningful nation-state fit and the nation is basically the brain and body of the state in the sense that

well, the ascending dynamics that influence what the control systems does.

In most cases, you will have, I'd say, a pretty much stronger decoupling because basically only elites would get a say in what the state does.

And in societies where, in most societies, the elite is not a defined ethnic group,

In that case, you will not have a clear fit between a nation and a state, although, of course, the committee of power that defines the state, if you conceive it as a nation, will define what the state's priorities are.

Well, participate to define, because, of course, they are the tool that's there.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

So awesome.

A lot of hands.

So Dean, then Blue, Stephen.


SPEAKER_06:
So I want to just circle back to what Andy just said.

Andy, if you go and look at this live stream three hours from now, even when you see a perfect reflection, we'll assume that this YouTube video comes out exactly as it intended.

I think what you just said proves that we're not talking about scale-free, we're talking about scale-friendly.

because what you will see is not what you just did.

And so I think that that has a huge bearing on this idea of what we're talking about here.

We can shape-shift into what Stephen Silet has pointed out here, is that that fact that we can fill between these two levels of scale,

doesn't mean that it's one size fits all.

It quite literally means is that we can fill, we can change, we can modify.

And I think that's recursion in its essence, as opposed to taking a reflection and knowing that the next time we look at that, it's going to be different because there's some elapsed time between the moment we said it and then the moment we heard ourselves say it.


SPEAKER_05:
Dean, I think that's an awesome point with scale-free and scale-friendly.

Scale-free, people usually mean to say that the mathematics or the formalism doesn't have an a priori system of interest or scale.

Like this is a centimeter theory or this is a kilometer theory.

So it's scale-free because it doesn't have that a priori reference scale.

But then scale-friendly, it's almost like, how about you tell me what scales you've identified and let's make them friends.

through interaction and iterated modeling.

And so we're friendly to scale and scaling, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's free.

Although from the other side, it's also fair to say that it's a scale-free framework in the way that a Bayesian computational framework or even a linear model is scale-free.

It doesn't a priori say that kilometer is the default unit for linear regression either.

Blue, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
So I think what I'm going to say is going to touch on the comments that were made by both Andy and Serval.

First of all, in terms of this relationship, like the mutual interest being the fundamental unit of identity and like collective identity, this really goes back to expansion of your cognitive boundary beyond yourself.

And like when we were talking about the computational boundary of a self, again, I'm going to like always refer to that live stream.

But there's an informational sharing when there's an identity sharing.

So when you expand your cognitive boundary to include more than just yourself, like if you have like a really deep connection, a really deep relationship with one person, you have like a great degree of mutual information between you and that one person.

And then so say you have like a family unit or like a network of close friends.

There's a large degree of informational sharing.

And so in this sense of building a nation, like the fundamental unit of identity then maybe is actually informational.

So it goes back to like Bayesian principles where there's this informational sharing that then allows you to update your generative model.

So just to kind of speak to that.

And then also maybe to just like,

maybe help Andy make the link between downward causation imposed by a government or a hierarchical control institution and the emergence that happens when people come together and share information in a collective.

There's a super cool paper by David Krakauer called The Information Theory of Individuality,

And it talks about, like, in order to become an individual, and there are many different kinds of individuals, but in order to become an individual, there has to be, like, a bidirectional information flow that's both emergent, starting with, like, the fundamental units, like the people sharing information.

There's an emergent and then a top-down.

So bottom-up and top-down.

And, like, when you have this bidirectional information flow, that's, like, what allows you to form a boundary, I guess, around your collective, something like that.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Blue, Stephen, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, so picking up what Dean said there, and so, yeah, there's, and actually Blue and everyone else is, the formulism is scale free at the free energy principle, and then you get into applied active, so then you get into active inference,

which has a sort of a scale free quality.

And then you get into adaptive active inference.

And then you get into, you know, inaction of adaptive active inference.

And then you get organisms like us that want to apply active inference.

And I think it does like really start to go scale friendly once you start to go up.

And one thing that I find interesting, I've been, this actually is nicely, it ties into this infusion space work that I do, but I look at the face

the body so at the there's a particular scale at which my mind is embodied and you can see it and the bit that you see is the bit that we show on this screen you're not looking at my foot or my shoulder or my hands you're looking at the face the face is the embodiment of my mind as an identity

Okay.

This is my projective identity and it becomes very useful.

So it's, it's scale friendly at that scale, but you know, until the other scales of my body aren't, you know, my liver doesn't do a great job of my identity.

Okay.

And then we got, okay, what scale do I have to get to?

I'm talking around.

If I'm just talking one-on-one, I don't sit here waving a Canadian flag or whatever.

Right now, if I'm a crowd of a thousand,

Now maybe we need to have a big flag on a stick, right?

And that becomes my face, right?

That becomes my projection.

But that's a scale friendly because now I've, again, it's kind of gone in and recapitulated in the environment.

So that's kind of interesting.

Thanks.

Thank you, Stephen.

Sir Valk?


SPEAKER_01:
I don't really get the debate about a scale-free, scale-friendly thing, because what a scale-free theory is, is a theory that is, in principle, a formalism that's in principle, it's not a really different scale.

For example, I have a position to...

the weak and strong forces that only have a measurable effect at very small spatial scales, gravitation and electromagnetism that can influence things that are pretty much afar.

Well, not electromagnetism because you have the mutual concerning of plus and minus charges, but in principle it could affect things at distance because of the air square.

And the fact that you have a theory that is scale-free does not entail that every system where you express the theory is scale-free.

For example, you have the gravitation theory that is scale-free, but if you study the solar systems, it has a scale, which is about the distance from the Sun and the further thing apart.

If you study electromagnetic motor,

it has a scale which is, well, the size of the matter.

And if you study a biological organism with a scale pre-formalism, it has a scale which is whatever scale at which the organism happens to exist.

So I don't get what the debate is about.


SPEAKER_05:
Dean, how about you give a thought on that?


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, I got a thought on that.

So I think we can see what a reflection is.

We can see what a triangle is.

We can see a very small triangle and we can see a very large one.

Those are reflections, but that is not recursion.

And as soon as you get into variability upon variability, you're going to have to come up with something more than a reflection.

And I think that's why you have to come up with something more than scale-free.

I mean, we can see scale-free, and nobody's arguing against that, but I guess what I'm pointing out is that if we limit ourselves to that, we're not going to see the entire picture.


SPEAKER_05:
all kind of intermediate, I think.

They're both very valuable views.

Scale-free is certainly more aligned with the way that people do talk about formal models, whereas scale-friendly is a little more of a deanism, which is always fun.

I see scale-friendly as emphasizing the active role of the modeler in connecting the levels.

So it's not enough to just say like, I have a stretchy ruler that could apply to different scales.

It's not an a priori scaled ruler.

And then making it more of this process of approaching the mechanisms and the processes that

are interacting amongst scales, rather than just thinking, well, we'll put the linear regression on a little thing, we'll put the linear regression on the big thing, and then we'll have a scale-free applied theory.

This is more like, let's take that system as a indivisible unit of function, and then like interact with it in a little bit more of an act-inf way,

And it can still be scale-free for those who like that way of talking about it.

But for those who want to get to know it, maybe scale-friendly is approachable as well.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think there's also active inference and adaptive active inference and inactive inference.

So I think like Daniel made a good point there is

keeping the active influence flow through and helping that

is really useful, right?

So that we don't lose the formalism side, because that's the danger, right?

We clip off the... But there is something.

For instance, at what point is adaptive active inference possible?

Like, is that the point when you need to have the brain within a reason, or there needs to be some generative process that's regulating active inference for it to then adapt at different temporal scales?

Now, that raises some other questions about exactly where, but there's...

that even the idea of what adaptive active inference, inactive active inference, or adaptive inactive potentially is, starts to then tie in well.

And if I can only do certain adaptive active inference with the brain, then it has to be the scale of an organism that has a brain.

And below that scale, it can't.

So there's something that becomes transitionary or contextual.


SPEAKER_05:
Dean, on this point, and then to serve all for a combined response.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, so again, I think knowing that a triangle is a triangle regardless of the volume of its footprint is important.

I think when we include updating, when we include time,

then we should include scale-friendly.

So I'm not discounting scale-free, but I'm saying that the updating process, whether you want to call that adaptation or inaction, the change aspect of it doesn't get resolved simply because a triangle is a triangle, if that makes sense.


SPEAKER_05:
Bucky Fuller said angle is metaphysical and general.

It doesn't refer to any specific substrate to say that something is a 60 degree angle.

And frequency is always bound up in space and time and the specifics.

So any realized system is going to be both.

Serval?


SPEAKER_01:
So, um...

Stephen, I think, talked about adaptive active inference.

Adaptive active inference is something that Keshav introduced in 2018, I think, something like that, tries to reproduce adaptive notions of cognition from active inference.

What it says is that you have agency when you have hierarchical modulation of active inference system.

You have higher level of active inference that modulates lower levels of active inference.

The question at rise is basically a question that is not solved and I don't even know what's my opinion on it.

in the ontology of science and naturalism, which is, do we have different levels of existence, or do we have only scales?

And even at this level, when we admit that we have things within things within things within things, and that's what equality is, it's complicated.

The thing is that, to circle back to a question that has been raised initially about how acting in France relates to other areas of cognition,

The way Kirchhoff tries to formalize inactive concepts of cognition is entirely wrong, because inactivists do not say that organisms are hierarchically modulated.

Active influence theorists say that the brain is modulated and they projected it on activists.

Activists say that a system that is cognitive must be operationally closed, which is it has a set of, it has a structure

or an organization, I don't know which, because of the American distinction, that basically reproduce its own existence without any clear support, without, autonomously from its environment.

That's not how they say it, but whatever.

And you have a specific formulation that is computational, it was formulated by people from the Basque Center of Life Sciences, I think the name is.

which is constraint closure.

So you have constraints that are slow processes that shape how faster processes behave, and you have a lot of them.

And collectively, these lots of constraints shape faster processes so as to maintain themselves.

That is constraint closure, and that is what the latest version of, on the inactive, not agency, but autonomy notion is.

And this entails not hierarchical modulation, but a meshed net of processes that make something else exist

at in-between scales and the notion of what is the ontic status to give this is pretty complicated i don't know i know people that think that level is just an epistemic construct that is built by scientists and this is pretty consistent with a graphical approach with a matched approach

this everything becomes ambiguous the meaning of every single terms uh become ambiguous so i have um

no idea what will be a correct way to refer to this uh scale free says what it says that it is not interested in specific scales of behavior and it also says implicitly when we are in the context factor in france that it is not interested in a specific antique level what applies for cells applies for a mutual organism which applies for societies

and which, in the case of Vanillat in France, also applies for dust, vortex, flames, and whatever.

So, I'm not sure... I'm still not sure what the National Skeleton is supposed to do and how it relates to...

the question of whether states are properly cognitive because we don't need a proper version, a proper notion of scales and proper anti-distinction, epistemic distinction between what is recursive and what is only a scale invariant.

We only need to state what being cognitive is and to check whether states are, and of course, what this means for the broader epistemic constructs we've built around this


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Serval.

Blue, then Steven.


SPEAKER_02:
So I have to like go back to the active inference live stream number 30, when we talked about how to count biological minds.

And really this like raises, so when you're talking about the distinction between adaptive active inference and like mere active inference, and in this theory about how to count biological minds, is everything that's biological, do all things then have a mind?

Like even down to like the, you know, single cell organisms.

In this paper, there are a lot of people who have this mind-life continuity hypothesis, and a lot of people really ascribe to that.

In this adaptive active inference versus mere active inference, I couldn't find the line.

I really pressed on Matt Sims about this, and he responded beautifully.

He also couldn't find the line.

At what scale or what level does adaptive active inference transition to mere active inference?

And what I'm fundamentally getting at is like, okay, so are you doing mere active inference if you're a single cell and you just move forward and back like towards a repulsant or an attractor, like is this mere active inference or is this adaptive also?

And so like adaptation to the niche, like to me, I think that happens at all levels, but there was this distinction made in that paper that like adaptive active inference happens when the collective

forms some emergent behavior that makes it more fitted to the niche environment.

And so where is the state then, a biological mind?

Does the state make a set of organisms more fitted to its niche through this collective, adaptive behavior?

Or is it maybe maladaptive?

Because overall, as a species, the more divides we have, the more war we'll have.

I don't know.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, thanks for this mesh nets idea.

I think that's definitely true.

And let's kind of fix in with the kind of meshed architecture.

I wonder if, like Blue was mentioning about this different scales of active inference,

identity is quite important here and the nation state is a kind of is maybe identity driven and I kind of wonder if we're to scale that down I was thinking scale down I was talking about the face there earlier but for instance the baby in the womb okay is the the release during childbirth of the hormones which triggers the woman to break her waters

basically like a broadcast from the identity of the womb.

So, okay, body, I'm here now.

I'm a childbearing womb.

I'm declaring myself in the same way that maybe the pituitary gland, but it does it all the time, declares itself certain times to create insulin.

So could we see that this meshed architecture comes at a scale where it's possible?

And in the same way, then, the nation state, maybe as we go up in scale, the expression of signifiers

to broadcast out becomes greater and greater, you know, becomes a bigger and bigger part of it.

And maybe the biological processes become less a part of it.


SPEAKER_05:
Well, definitely it's the question of realism and instrumentalism, whether it quote is a broadcast or whether we'll just choose to model it as.

So one of those is definitely safe territory.

And the other one is,

A little bit harder to make claims about what the territory is versus the map that we choose to draw around the territory.

Um, but very interesting points, Dean.


SPEAKER_06:
Okay, I'm on.

I just want to make sure that... I'll get feedback from people on this.

So to me, adaptation, okay, adaptation around what is, which can be scale-free, or if we're talking about active inference, do we also include the counterfactual what if?

And I think if we include the what if, then I'm not sure that adaptation

looks the same it's not reflective so i'm not pushing back on serval as much as i'm asking are we are we overfitting are we saying that recursion doesn't matter and are we saying that scale friendly doesn't matter because we only want to concentrate on what is that's my question dean i'll give a thought then stephen and then anyone else


SPEAKER_05:
active inference agents that are capable of doing adaptive active inference as a title.

So just a recently proposed word as Serval brought up.

Their internal generative model includes a model of perception and action as well as of cognition.

So that's metacognition.

The what-is of metacognition at one level can be a what-if at another level.

What-is is the agent can actually be imagining a counterfactual with respect to perception and action.

So cognition is that friendly scale.

It helps us bridge...

the what if and the what is.

Because there's so many other angles.

One other path to walk through that would be like in Anil Seth's book, Being You, there's a great discussion about how counterfactuals actually are like the basis of cognition.

Like,

how do we know that we're looking at a real mouse, like on my computer table versus like a picture of one at the same resolution?

Because actually there is an implicit counterfactual.

I could move at a different angle and see something different at the physical object, but I wouldn't expect the shadows to move on this JPEG.

And so actually, the difference in our perception between two things that visually can look identical relates to deep situational awareness that actually blur or at least reimagine the relationship between what is and what if.

Stephen, and then Blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Thanks.

Actually, this paper's serving as quite a useful bridging provocation.

Because as you just mentioned there, Daniel, with...

Okay, so what if, you know, a way of what if and counterfactuals.

So there's the cognition, which is a particular scale of perspectival, or even implicit, what if the counterfactual, but what if this and that happened in the future?

Well, the other question is, what am I becoming?

And actually, if we want to look at scale three, if

active influence is based on free energy principles and free energy principle was pretty much the only form of non-linear dynamical system out there but now we've got some of this stochastic chaos work also like if you go right back to non-linear dynamical systems and a lot of discussion around non-linear dynamical systems people are talking about thinking about that as a process of becoming so

how it gives you a way, what dimensionality can you use, what the process of becoming starts to tie into that.

And cognition as we see it doesn't, maybe the process of being

is more a process of becoming.

But the process of what I broadcast, using that term very crudely, what my identity conveys is a much more steady, much more of an artifactual state, if that makes sense.

Especially if I take a photo of it and put it up on my profile on Facebook.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

Here's an article on being and becoming, and that distinction, as well as I'm sure a panoply of German words, has been discussed for a long time about the relationship between being and becoming.

And just to give one thought before Blue, that generative model of the Act-Inf agent

includes what kind of agent am i what are my expectations preferences affordances etc so we get in the deep active inference framework built in what if and then what and then who would i be and how would others see me and what would they think if i were to do this and then this were to change that's all part of the state space of what's possible

These are like the grammar in terms of the very austere outline of perception, cognition, action, and external dynamics that allow composition and new design motifs for those kinds of questions to be asked.

Blue?


SPEAKER_02:
So if you wouldn't mind flipping back to the twisty slide, I think it's 33.

And when you're thinking about like, are we talking about what is, or are we also including the what ifs in the model?

Like when we talk about what it's like to build a state, so this is like how states have been built before.

But how can we take this, and as Daniel was referring to at the beginning of the talk, how can we take the what has been and incorporate what if via active inference to predict how to optimally form states in the future?

So is active inference incorporating the counterfactuals?

Are we going into what ifs?

Or what about what's next?

Not just what if, but what's next to predict the cognition, essentially, of a state and how it's going to think going forward?


SPEAKER_05:
Great question.

And what's next?

We can have our expectations.

We can have our preferences.

They can interact in a different way.

So Dean, then Andy.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, Blue, I think that ties in with the point twos that we tend to do.

All I would add to what's been said is that if we're looking at as, as is, we're looking at this reflection, and can we ask off of that, of what are we becoming, of becoming, which is a function, sometimes of scale, many times of variation.

So I know I keep beating this horse because I want to include the variation and the fact that time changes our picture.

That's all I want included in this.

And I don't think that that as is a perfect copy as we update.

so i maybe i'm maybe i'm explaining this wrong but i think as change occurs that perfect reflection that perfect copy doesn't move forward without variation concentration sometimes sometimes we just toss it out the window andy that's the what if sorry thank you dean andy and then i'll give a thought on the as change occurs so uh in my travels i've run across this idea that somebody tried to


SPEAKER_04:
quantify functions of a state that are universal, right?

What are the things like, how do you maintain healthcare?

Not necessarily which way is better, but distribution of resources, education, healthcare, things that we associate with the state.

Maybe not every one of them, every state exists or every nation exists, or let's stick with state.

Maybe not every state does every one of them.

Certainly not all of them do it.

to the same degree of competency.

And they are all bound within the expectations of the people who comprise that polity or that entity.

But to get after your question, Blue, if we want to get to what if, how is this different?

How do states form differently?

What is the optimal thing?

Then I think you've got to get down to a core set of variables for which states are supposed to provide solutions to.

or address.

And then from there, we can see, well, what if they did it this way?

What if they prioritized this and not that?

What if they prioritized this function over that function, and why would they?

What are they responding to?

I don't think that they're responding to necessarily uniquely physical or material requirements.

I think there's some interplay between intellectual or values-based requirements, as well as material requirements, all mixed up in time and space.

given which parts of history we choose to preference in a particular moment.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

So one note on the as change occurs.

Here's a very influential book with a broad follow-up lineage on the geometry of biological time by Winfrey, and it brings us back to the discussion of Kairos and how change occurring in Kronos, we become like Procrustes.

We have to stretch and pull and change

the sequence of action to fit onto the scale as defined.

Whereas thinking about the space of action, the geometry of biological time is defined more by action, like embryological events, rather than how many seconds have ticked on some atomic clock in some bunker.

So that as change occurs,

can be through time, but it may not be the kind of time that gets ticked out on a clock.

And that's just a very different way to talk about actions and inference because it's dynamic, but it's not just like, okay, the clock's running and things are changing.

It's like, there's actually a timeliness to action.

And so we're talking about the dynamics of the context and the timeliness.

And then maybe there's ways to map Kronos and Kairos, or maybe one time we play more into one or the other.

So Dean, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, just real quick.

Thank you, Andy, because I think what you did is you applied a partition to preference and priority, and you made sure that we didn't say that they were one and the same.

So in real time, we see an evolution throughout the discourse.

So I think that's a real example of what kind of happens as we update.


SPEAKER_05:
So, one other random thought just from earlier, and then, of course, anyone just bring up a thought or anyone in the live chat.

So, we were talking earlier about, like, capital with an O-L and capital with an A-L.

Okay, so this was pretty interesting.

Capital with an O-L comes from Capitolium, the name of the Temple of Jupiter at Rome on the Capitoline Hill.

So...

Dating in English from the 14th century.

So that is referring to this building.

That's very much like City on a Hill.

And City on a Hill is used as a multi-scale allusion to the United States, at the very least.

Like Capitol Hill, but of course, broader notions of what...

the state stands for.

And then there's capital with A-L.

Capitel, on the other hand, has a far wider range of meanings and application.

The word comes from Latin as well, from caput, meaning head.

And then it has a lot of polysemous uses, like capital punishment, which we talked of being the seat of government, like Sacramento is the capital of government.

California, but then like venture capital, capitalization.

So that's just interesting.

I hope it's not simple wordplay when there's a homonym, but it's very interesting that they both draw back to Rome, which was alluded to earlier when thinking about the seeds of what today's states are on the world stage.

So Andy, then Steven.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah.

So well, it,

Would institutions of the state, like Ministry of Foreign Affairs, be considered an example of embodied intelligence in the context of cognition for the state?


SPEAKER_01:
Yes.

Something that Blue said earlier is that people proposed collective agency to be based on the capability of a certain kind of

regime of behavior to influence individual fitness.

What I would say is that this is wrong.

The biological organization, it is by definition organization, but it is constraints that exist upon the collective behavioral system.

if you look at say it's a steel beam it is a structure it is something that affects how the steel beam interacts with the world and this is something that is entirely invisible from the perspective of a single particle of steel which is the natural lower level lower scale

perspective you can articulate.

So the view that organization is entailed by things that affect the niche of their constituents is flawed.

What organization is, is a constraint at a specific scale, on a specific behavior, on a specific dynamic.

the relation it has uh with the body the body uh which uh certain uh certain scale of cognition is about is uh the set of those constraints uh that collectively enact uh behavior that we say is cognitive so when a mystery of foreign affairs or something

is doing a thing.

It is embodied in the sense that it participates in a greater network of constraints which collectively build an organisation which entails the behaviour of each specific decision of the Ministry of Foreign Policy.

So, for example, if there is some kind of

collective moral panic against communism is likely, in the absence of any formal statement against communism, that decision be best against specific people and words and themes perturbed communists.

This is not entailed by anything at the formal level, at the level of symbolic computation that could be construed as constituting the highest or most recognizable forms of state cognition.

Yet, this participates in a collective behavior that is adapted from the border system.

This is basically the nation-state distinction from earlier.

the aggregated behavior of specific sets of precision constraints past processes will build the slower processes and basically entail the behavior.

And this is not something that needs to be acknowledged from any higher level.

And this yet is cognition.

And these grounds of view of analytical cognition are something that

for the states as something that is grounded in not the body of any single individual, but in the body of the state as the set of its constituting constraints.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks, Serval.

I also put up a quote that people can pause the video and read from the Gulag Archipelago.

That specifically refers to organizations as organs of the state, which is a little bit of a almost sinister meat grinder way to describe the state.

And it refers to this interplay between the awareness and the actions of individuals and the systems outcomes at the state level.

Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah i think as well as this this is really useful i think this embodiment and our intuitive ability to embody um does then recapitulate the inference process so as well as these terms uh the seat of government or whatever coming from say we see it coming from roman literature but over time it's been encoded and encoded and maybe abstracted out and we use words

And sometimes you have to look up the etymology to sort of find out where they came from.

But we do intuitively see a difference.

If someone says someone's going to take their seat at the Senate, well, you get a feel for that.

But you don't say they're going to take their seat at the palace.

They're going to sit in the throne, right?

Because the whole point of the palace is that those seats are not everyday seats, right?

But you get that because of how you know space is treated around one of those seats.

You don't put a load of seats around and roll up a load of thrones.

You give space to it.

And there's actually a lot of interesting work in physical theatre where you literally can work with space to convey how much space you give someone will convey how much power they have.


SPEAKER_05:
That reminds me of the term meronym.

So that's like when you say there were 10 mouths to feed.

It's referring to a system by referring to the sub part of the system.

So it's kind of like merotypology is about the parts and holes and merology.

And so the meronym is when revealed through our language, we say there were 20 seats on that committee.

And the fluidity at which that is semantically unpacked shows that there is a relationship.

Like when you say there was 20 mouths, you think there was 20 people.

And that includes a lot of our assumptions.

10 pairs of hands or 10 hands.

What does that say about our assumptions about ableism or about what the default is in our way of speaking like that, Stephen, and then anyone else?


SPEAKER_00:
yeah uh and well ableism definitely comes in then as these sub these codes as people start to look at ableism that that's a very good point and also there's that intuitive understanding that you know there's there's the idea that a team generally is really more between five and ten people to optimally be a team and then you've got this idea of a group so you have an intuit when you hit 20 you've gone past

small group into a large group and there's a whole work around large group interventions and getting aspects of the system in the room which is about when you can no longer look at each person in the eye and hold it which is sort of after 15 16 people so again you hit this to some extent we don't need to be taught that these things evoke

reality for us as this structured organism in space in place now it's probably different for a dog on four legs maybe they can only sniff around four dogs right and that's a big crowd for them so you know and is that about their mind or is that about their their morphology so it's definitely an interesting question thank you servo and then anyone else


SPEAKER_01:
I like the way you talk of the throne as something whose function is communicated through medically-embodied cues, because the cognitive activity of the state is embodied in constraints that are not human.

those constraints need to somehow affect the behavior of humans because those faster dynamics are basically the dynamics of a human individual.

They need ways to constrain it and influence it to exist as constraints.

And a major way they do so is by building the niche humans living.

So building the way humans embody their perceptions,

relate to each other to each other take decisions etc etc and um to simply build a monumental architecture to convey that specific buildings have specific functions and are very important and that you have to understand that

The underlying philosophy to exist as a functional member of society, it's a way to do so and that's a way which the throne basically affects people to believe in the kind of exceptional qualities of the sovereign which are necessary for a state that has a sovereign to exist.


SPEAKER_05:
So the throne and the crown or any other kind of token there.

So it's embodied.

It refers to a wearable or a bodily position.

It refers to, of course, an encultured and a semiotic context.

It's enacted.

That relates to declarative speech acts.

I pronounce you married.

The speech act is...

the action.

And so when we're talking about writing and language driven systems,

which is a key part of, again, that deep histories section, declarative speech acts become very important.

When you're served the subpoena or when something is ruled, then the hammer comes down on the table with like sort of like the finality of the act, like an onomatopoeia relative to the declaration that was uttered in a certain ritualized context.

These are great examples about

how we can use like the 4E framework.

And also I was going to say it's extended because the crown and the throne, they're literally off of the body.

And then what's the story that's like the total, like, oh, king got owned, emperor's new clothes, where the extended cognitive apparatus that signals the cultural position of the king is revealed to be not what it is.

And so it's like to strip the person of their role, it's just like stripping off their clothes.

And these are just all kinds of very accessible phenomena that we can ask, how does this support a 4E or an active inference approach?

relative to some other approach.

Like signal processing, yeah, I'm sure you can make the neural network that recognizes a crown versus other images, but that is like a sub-component of visual perception

within this broader picture.

And then also it helps us ask, what if?

And how we could design embodied and cultured, enacted, extended, et cetera, systems that reflect the statistical regularities of who we are now and how we think things are and how we expect and prefer things to change.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that's a very good point.

And maybe this is where

you know, Savar was talking about constraints there and also, I suppose, comes back to the idea of when to stop.

I talked about this a little bit with Dean yesterday.

When do we know when to stop is one of the big challenges about, you know, ecological context.

And I keep thinking, so, you know, you have the hammer comes down, you know, if you have a state, you know, the hammer comes down, you viscerally have an embodied understanding of what's being communicated by them.

you know, that comes down, something's been hammered out, and in the Houses of Parliament in the UK they have this big mace, they call it the mace, it's an ornamental mace, but of course a mace, well I don't know if this is exactly true, but I think of a mace normally as something you club someone over the head with, right, in a battle, right, so it's there as maybe that big stick idea that's been brought in, but

One thing that really came to mind when this was coming up was what happened during Nazi Germany when the new technology of sound systems came out.

So the big thing that happened was these big rallies that completely overwhelmed people is no one had had, just like we didn't have with social media before, no one had had an embodied experience to calibrate

in some ways you maybe never can because it becomes slightly beyond the concepts of embodiment what it meant to be in this big arena where you heard sound coming from everywhere and it then the idea is that that was part of the reason where it become disruptive maybe

we weren't able to constrain and it just became a cancerous almost overwhelm.

But there's something about new technologies and the ability to constrain and find a state that is to some extent sustainable and when it becomes out of control.

And is there something about the embodiment that Daniel was talking about there?

Thank you, Stephen.


SPEAKER_05:
Serval, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_01:
I want to emphasize that, as in the formalism I'm calling out to, the notion of a constraint does not entail the notion of an interdiction, of a top-down order, or of

of a stop on a behavior.

A constraint is a slow process that modulates a fast process.

For example, if we agree on the sound of some word, say a lamp, so we have a relatively slow process that is our couple behavior that will constrain our relative faster processes.

In the sense that when one of us use the word lamp, the other will understand what it refers to.

So it will basically allow the dimensionality of the possible behavior I have, because I will only pick behavior that are consistent with the fact that you said the word lamp, as I understand it.

So the way that we culturally build our niches

It's not something we understand as constraining.

It's something we understand as creative.

And yet it corresponds pretty naturally to the concept of constraint as would be used by a physicist or a stem biologist, which is the sense I use in that paper.


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks.

It reminds me of a paper I could find it with like, it was like developmental constraints or opportunities.

And it was just saying, you can think about like, okay, I guess there's some morphological creature that just extends in a blob.

But any other one that has facilitated enabled affordances to grow in one direction is

can be framed as the constraint from the other dimension.

And so there are two sides of the coin to talk about what is the constraint that enables.

It's like chess.

It's the enabling constraints on chess moves that allow brilliant chess games and a culture to actually arise.

So just to follow with a direct response, then Steven and Blue.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, thank you.

I think Blue had her hand up first, I'm not sure.

But what I wanted to say is that to have something that exists as an input construct to have interacting behaviour, you need signature breakings.

For example, you need a particle of gas to not be independent.

The default assumption of a physicist is that everything depends on nothing.

Each particle evolves independently, essentially.

So this means that I need basically the mean and the variance of their individual trajectories to have all of the necessary information on my system.

This corresponds to light pressure and temperature, depending on what the trajectory is.

Well, there is no clear mapping, actually.

Whatever.

But if I somehow forbid... If I somehow build

correlation between the behavior of those particles then there are new possible behavior pretty much you have new possible elements of this set space that exist you have a creation as far as a physicist that is concerned with behavior within certain set spaces

is as far as I forgot my phrase.

But the physicist sees creation because there are things that were not part of the set space he drew at the beginning of the existential system that become existence, something that was not and that now is.

And what is interesting is this process of becoming, as we discussed earlier.

because you have kinds of symmetries building and symmetries breaking that are constructive, and yet they need to be constraining, because if everything just arbitrarily adopts any kind of behavior in the state space that is accessible, that is possible in principle, you have just a full entropy, you have what noise?

You have literally nothing there.

You have just particles that blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah.

And the fact of existence that we have things to talk about, it entails the constraining of the possible set space to everything is equally likely to some of the things are more likely.

And it entails a meaningful map between the possible

states at the macro level, at the lowest possible level description, and the states as we are interested in at a specific moment.

So that was providing on the way that constraints are not restrictive but creative.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

The absence of restraints, statistically, constraints would just refer to an unconnected Bayesian graph just independently vibrating

variables.

And so to have anything that's tracking or anticipating something else, we're discussing the imposition of constraints using that term.

Stephen, and then Andy.


SPEAKER_00:
You mentioned, I see what Daniel, you put there, enabling systems slash constraints.

So I think there is that.

I totally get, and I think it's a very good point about, you know, you've got the statistics, stochastic chaos, and you've got the general dynamical processes, and there's gonna be some way of constraining that through different levels.

um there's also then uh you know if we take consciousness as being at the brain the brain stem and not in the frontal cortex you know and it's then sending stuff out you know i can see that biological dynamic but you also have this enabling system process of scale i suppose that in a way that i was just referring to and these things can start to be like

the ball rolling down the hill so to speak you know it starts to accumulate um its own because it's it doesn't need to extract information to make inferences to make things happen it's just happening through thermodynamics and dynamics um i wonder how we can think about the challenge of these macro systems then

the enabling system overriding the emergent dynamical system.

Thank you.

Andy?


SPEAKER_04:
Is there a fundamental difference between thinking like a state and thinking like a tribe, or is it just a level of sophistication with what specialties are enabled once you get a state level?


SPEAKER_05:
Thanks for the question, Serval.


SPEAKER_01:
A state has administrative systems.

A tribe does not.

So, like you have a lot of ways societies can be organized that are somewhat in a continuum.

What I call a state is a specific control system that, well, is in a precipitary state.

Either it exists or it does not.

And in the case of...

Perhaps I don't think most of what we call tribe have an integrated decision system, more like shared ethnic cultural norms.

And if they have integrated decision systems, it's certainly nothing like administration.


SPEAKER_05:
It's so fascinating because the tribe can be implicitly existing without a state, as Serval just noted.

And it makes me think about Web3 and DAOs, where it's almost like the states are being defined first, and then the people are rushing in to fill.

So instead of the historical emergence of specialization and elaboration and formalization on top of an implicit...

background of the people.

And then in a complex interplay, as we've been discussing, this is almost like a computational state that people are migrating to with a preset governance system, sometimes one that's incredibly constraining and people may not even know how constraining until they're there.

So that's an inversion of

how we've seen the members of the state and the state's evolution engage.

So more things change, the more they stay the same, but it's a different river for sure.

So Dean, Blue, Steven.


SPEAKER_06:
I think I found something that I can say I can agree with Serval and maybe some of the people who really like genetics, because I think constraint really matters.

And I think the idea that ratio

is not phenotypical drift through neutral mutations, even though mutations are a ratio of the non-mutations.

I also think that ratios and randomness accommodations are not the same thing.

So I think constraint allows us to be able to see the difference between those two things.

One is when a triangle is a triangle and the other is when a variation plays upon a variation.

And I think we can accept both.

That's where I think the constraint piece actually helps us pull the two things together.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you, Dean.

Blue, then Stephen.


SPEAKER_02:
So just to kind of go back to what Andy was saying about the difference between a tribe and a state, but also when do we know when to stop and processes that constrain.

And when I think about this bi-directional information flow,

If the emergent energy is too strong, then it's out of control, right?

There's no constraint.

But when the constraint is too strong, I think about even in mental action, the idea that your grip is too tight.

And so whatever you're trying to control pops out of your grip, right?

So you can squeeze a balloon and then boom.

And so there has to be like some balance.

And I just wonder if that balance is like quantifiable.

Like does downward information have to equal upward information flow?

Like is there like a balance between those two things that allows like a self-emergent or not a self-organizing entity to maintain in the state of an attractor?

Because of like the information flow is too much in one way or the other, the balance goes off and it'll steer away from that attractor space.


SPEAKER_05:
Steven, and then I'll add a comment on that blue.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, I think that the ability to constrain is going to be at different levels in the state.

You've got certain things which are just like constitutional.

We hear this in the states, there's constitutional rights, right?

They're fixed, they can't change.

It's been there for 200 years or whatever.

And then you've got more negotiation.

And in the UK, you've got the government has to go and talk to the Queen every couple of weeks or every week.

so in theory the queen could constrain now again they don't just have to send the letter they have to go and meet in person and talk there has to be so then there's this intersubjective dynamical constraint and then of course then for scaling you've got the kind of we can't really do it as organisms so we put in an electoral system but the electoral system and the the democracy in north america comes a lot from the tribe that the

the sort of scaled tribes of North America as much as it does from France.

It's quite interesting.

And one thing they have in Toronto, we have the Treaty of the Dish of One Spoon.

And the Treaty of the Dish of One Spoon is basically they sat round in a circle and they have a dish with one spoon and you only take enough for yourself and you leave enough for nature.

And it's passed round and that's the treaty of how to look after the Great Lakes.

And actually, it was a lot of that kind of slightly scaled version of tribal work, which then informed and said, OK, Europe, you're killing each other all the time.

What about something a little bit like this?

So actually, democracy in the US was partly from the

not really tribes anymore, but that kind of scaled piece.

So I think there's that need to sort of draw back into something which is more contextual, more dynamical, as well as the kind of, I don't know, the more kind of law-based approach.


SPEAKER_05:
Thank you.

So people have been mentioning the getting a grip, which was of course from the paper about how states get a grip on their subjects.

And that was drawn from the work of Yella and Rydvold talking about optimal grip and skilled performance and all these other cool inactive and ecological psychological ideas we've talked to.

So it's like of all the trajectories that the golf club can take,

we're constraining that to some lower dimensional manifold, that's getting a grip.

And I totally agree.

I think a good example of an empirical system and about what kind of reciprocal interactions exist and what attractor states does that beget.

is the federalist, anti-federalist discussion at the end of the 1700s in the United States with people saying, if you have the affordance for a standing army at the federal scale, then we'll see this happen at the lower state level.

Or if there's the ability to engage in foreign diplomacy or print debt at the federal level, then we'll see this happen or not at the state level.

And so I think that's where we go from sort of the

what has been and what is to the future that we don't know about the what if where we are in that scale friendly level where we're talking about designing or modifying or preserving or intervening in

those causal threads that do link and co-constrain the smaller subunits with the larger processes and how do we talk about the space of design there and integrate our preferences and expectations together with just sometimes the

dazzling and tragic and complex history of just everything we see on this map so we'll have just um a few minutes left let's from anyone who'd like to let's just hear like some last thoughts

What's something cool from today or what's something that you're looking forward to discussing more next week?

Otherwise, it's been an awesome .1.

So, Stephen, and then we'll go around to anyone else.


SPEAKER_00:
Following on what you were saying there, Daniel, and I'll use this as a sum up.

It slightly opens up a new thing, which maybe we'll get to the next session, but how do we see what happens with the nature of tech companies and the huge affordances that that puts into our landscape?

Also, the constraints, if we take the McLuhan tech trad of how it

then changes the way we behave overall they're introducing rather than um a constraining or a sort of a wise constraining way it's it's putting out there what's out there and it's it's affording huge amounts of new novel interactions be it microsoft be it google be it facebook

And then they're getting hugely powerful just through permeation into society.

So, you know, something that's interesting is then where does, you know, I think that may reflect one of the challenges we have at the moment with corporations getting so big.

So thank you.

And this is a very, very good talk and lots of things are sparking off it.

So I appreciate it.


SPEAKER_05:
thank you yeah like nation states used to be like states were the big players in town there was big ones and there were smaller ones but that was sort of like the ultimate level of analysis web 2 we saw websites stock tickers apple amazon etc become bigger than many states and intertwined and amongst them in a way that sometimes is even more advantageous though they don't

have citizenships themselves, they have user identifiers, they have revenue flows, they have governance models.

And then now into web three we go.

And platforms and protocols, maybe even decentralized ways

of accumulating governance and economic systems that will also be at least initially larger than smaller nation states and web 2 tech companies so there's going to be like legacy like web 0 1 2 3 4 all of these systems are going to be on the same territory but they're going to have different maps so they're going to be coordinating very differently

Would anyone else like to give a closing thought?

I think there's a lot of stuff in the dot too that we'll be able to like jump off into, like Serval next week, I want to hear about where we go next, like what are your next personal research goals and what are other opportunities for individuals who want to like learn more or research or apply in this area or under this framework?

Blue, and then anyone else.


SPEAKER_02:
So just a final thought, I'd like to like discuss more or maybe get more into like what is the state anticipating and how do they anticipate what's coming next?

Just predictive behavior.


SPEAKER_05:
Yeah, and it will be fun also to like just connect some of these to the core terms in the active infantology.

Just like what are the sense states of the states?

What are the action states of the states?

Let's, you know, what is attention?

Is that the most wanted list?

What are the ways that we can just take the terms that we already have and start to build up this table of mappings so that we can, and maybe it's going to fit on multiple levels.

So it's not going to be just the one and only map of maps, but it'll be a draft versionable participatory set of mappings.

And that'll be fun.

Dean.


SPEAKER_06:
Yeah, what I really appreciated about the paper was the ability to sort of look at things through the scale invariance lens.

And now I'm really curious to see what would happen if we got off the map and started moving around and then actually incorporated scale variance.

Because I think that's really the and then what happens piece that this paper affords.

It gives us a good grounding.

And now we can step off of that and think in the hypothetical space.

And I'm really curious to see where that goes.

Excellent.


SPEAKER_05:
Andy, if you have any last comments?


SPEAKER_04:
Well, thanks for letting me play.

I really enjoyed the conversation.

And a lot of this was new to me, right?

I'm new to even the idea of active inference, but being able to discuss it in concepts of the state, incredibly interesting.

So thanks for letting me participate.


SPEAKER_05:
Excellent.

Well, it's always a two or more way straight.

So we all had an awesome time.

Thank you everybody for participating.

We hope to see you here and or participants through listening in another live stream, in the lab, working with us on projects.

So see you all later.

Talk to you next time.

## S5nXqPysU3I

SPEAKER_03:
Hello and welcome everyone.

Thanks for joining.

It's November 30th, 2021.

And we're in Act-Inf Lab live stream number 33.2 on thinking like a state embodied intelligence in the deep history of our collective minds.

This is the second discussion we've had on this paper.

And if you're watching along live, definitely ask us questions because it'll help us have a fun feedback and a discussion.

Welcome to Active Inference Lab.

We are a participatory online lab that is communicating, learning, and practicing applied active inference.

You can find us at the links here on this slide.

This is a recorded and an archived livestream, so please provide us with feedback so that we can improve our work.

All backgrounds and perspectives are welcome, and we'll be following good video etiquette for livestreams.

It's a new slide.

The short link is gone.

It's been deprecated.

Thanks to the work of many awesome ActifLab participants and especially Jessica B, we have moved over our live stream past and upcoming database to a Coda site.

So you can go to this Coda site or maybe somebody can post the link.

And this is an interactive way for you to look at

the date, video, the title, the number, the guests that were on the stream, the keywords, all the links.

This is linked up with our knowledge management as well as our people

management, CRM as they call it.

So this is an awesome tool that we're using with Coda and hopefully it improves the findability and the indexability so that if you're looking for some keyword, you can find all the live streams where we discussed that keyword or if you have somebody who you like to listen to, then you can find them in the guests or in the participants section and you can hear what they had to say about a certain topic at a certain time.

Today in ACT-INF stream 33.2, we're going to be having our .2 jump off slash speculate onwards and upwards discussion on the paper by Evel Gwinnon-Kalu, Thinking Like a State, Embodied Intelligence in the Deep History of Our Collective Minds.

So we'll just have fun.

We have some topics from last time that we put on a slide for 33.2 that we can talk a little bit through.

As always, things come up and it'd be great to have anyone's questions in the live chat.

Otherwise, we're just going to be chilling and talking about this cool paper.

So we will start with introductions and then just take it from there.

I'm Daniel.

I'm a researcher in California, and I'll save my specific excitements or what I'd like or remembered about the paper for our kind of intro round, and I'll pass to Dean.


SPEAKER_01:
Hi, I'm Dean.

I'm from Calgary, and I'm kind of interested, like you said, in seeing what happens when, like, our migration from Google to Coda

and we pick up and move off of some of these representations or some of these ideas, what that looks like.

And I'll pass it over to Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
Hello.

I'm Stephen.

I'm based in Toronto.

And yeah, I'm interested about a lot of the generative binoculars I think this paper starts to create.

And I've had some good conversations with Dean, actually, and we've been chewing over

how much this maybe opens new doors, maybe is a step too far at this stage, and where other doors we might have that we can step into.

So I think it's an interesting set of mirrors and alleyways to go into.


SPEAKER_03:
So I'm curious what those doors are, which ones have ramps, which ones are downhill, which ones are a spiry staircase.

Like what places would one go from this paper?

And I'm sure we can start even writing on our 33.2 slide.

Like what are those doors?

Are they ajar?

Are they locked?


SPEAKER_01:
So Daniel, one of the things, and I don't know if this is sense-making or just messing with something, but if a city was made up oftentimes like what we see in some of MC Escher's work, and then there were Markov blankets all over the place, what might that look like relative to sort of the,

the city that I live in or the city that you live in or the city that Stephen lives in, and are there ways that we can, are there similarities and are there real differences between what that sort of MC Escher world and Markov blankets would represent as versus their actual representations of actual cities?

That's one of my questions.


SPEAKER_03:
so let me kind of unpack that you're talking about the MC Escher art with the stairs going in different apparent directions and asking whether those portals would reflect intelligently designed transporters or what does that physical or cyber physical City look like


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, in many of these live streams, you've had one image on the slide that has the ants walking around the, I forget what that symbol is.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, a Mobius strip with ants.


SPEAKER_01:
Thank, a Mobius strip.

So that would be an example of a real representation that we could generate.

But is that a city?

That's my question.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, Stephen, and welcome, Dave.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, is that a city?

I mean, it also takes me thinking about something called transect walks, which is what you can do in a participatory engagement with a town or something, where literally you transect or you walk through a cross-section of a town and you just see what you end up encountering.

the way of structuring participation.

But it's an interesting question.

So basically, you start to move through it, and we go through a path and start to see what's on that route.

And it's the same, it's then that sort of question that goes back to, you know, when I was talking about the doorways, it's like, everyone's been like, so where do I find my doorways and start squeezing through the doorway?

Or when do I need to, again, step back and find the unifying principles?

When do I need to go back to accuracy and complexity?

And when do I go in to try and force it through the doorway?

And active influence has allowed me to step back and hold more rather than try and not worry about fitting through the doorway.

However, as we realise as we're talking here, at some point you need to put stuff into...

communications uh be it encoder be it in google docs you know so in some ways you're going to categorize for practice practical purposes right but it's not the same as walking on the movis strip so there's an interesting challenge as practitioners that we face okay welcome back dave i hope it's working just


SPEAKER_03:
Everyone remember to mute if you're not talking and turn off all your messaging applications.

The idea of the transect, that reminds me a lot of ecology, where we know that there's spatial and temporal variation, but a common approach is to take a transect, like either going up an elevation gradient

or going within the same elevation gradient.

So those are kind of like the two directions that we always talk about, going on the irrotational component that climbs straight up the hill to see how elevation changes biodiversity, or to go at the same altitude, maybe on a north to south, to ask how does latitude influence biodiversity at a given elevation?

That's like that iso contour.

So then the transect is a sampling approach.

that in the context of a generative model gives us a picture of the map of the territory.

So, yeah, Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that's good.

I think it's probably been ported over, whoever did that.

It's probably more used in participatory development.

community development than participatory theatre.

Theatre support development might touch on it, but a lot of times theatre work, they don't really go there, they just talk about scenes and situations.

I think the transect is a nice way to sort of walk through and get a cross-section in that kind of semi-scientific way.

But I actually then was much more interested in going for a social topography, just allowing people to get the whole landscape out there, which in some ways, once we get into the kind of agent-based stuff,

work, which I didn't know about back in the day.

But, you know, then, because the argument would be, well, the transect is already adding all this complication.

You've got people walking, taking a cross section of the town as opposed to having something nice and clean.

It's adding some, why go even further?

But the, you know, active influence says, well, it's okay if your regime of attention is being

organized around a certain type of abductive inference, right?

So yeah, you don't want to be doing it if you're deducting, because you'll just get completely swallowed up by it.

So that could be interesting sort of crossover there.


SPEAKER_03:
It's like one way to take the transect and perhaps a null transect would be a quote straight line that would just be unbiased or it's a simple choice.

And then in a city, you might want to take that transect or you might be on rails.

So you might be taking the F Muni in San Francisco and that's like giving you scenes of city life and

And that actually speaks to the difference between Kronos and Kairos.

Kronos is like that straight line that just doesn't care whether you're putting the meter stick over the city or the mountain.

And then Kairos is like that streetcar or the path.

It's like you're walking along the path, but it might have curves, but that's the path that you're on.

So then that's more like Kairos.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so I...

don't know whether the author was intending this, but one of the things that I took away from the paper that I thought was really potentially an amazing insight from the paper was the fact that if you go into a city,

you can get a sense of a feeling of the city.

So there is a collective feel.

I'll take my own personal example.

You can go into the city of Barcelona, and it isn't just where it is situated on a coast.

There is a fundamental feeling difference as somebody who is now within that geographic territory than the one that you sense when you're in Madrid or when you're in Lisbon.

They each have a collective feel about them.

And it isn't just that you want it to be different because the architecture is different or where it's situated on a hill is different.

There's actual social aspects of that feeling which make themselves present and which you attune to.

So I don't, I would never argue with the fact that as an example of

a collective act of inference that cities couldn't exhibit those types of not just behavior, but sense of who we are and what we are, what we are.

But I'm not sure, like again, I'm not sure if the scale aspect of this actually works, because as I said, in my mind, I can do the MC Escher thing all the time.

I can twist things and invert things, but it's hard to do that with dead things made of concrete.

I'm not saying it can't happen, but I don't see examples of that out there when things scale up and out.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Dean.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, and say as you're walking, if you say walking down these routes in Barcelona, for instance, as Dean mentioned there, you know, there's the route that we pass along and that's kind of what's available and there's a scale that's friendly to being available.

There's a certain size of building, there's a certain, you know, at the end of the day, if you're walking on your, or you're going through some ambulatory route,

There's things available to you.

But there's also then what's adjacent to that and what's hidden and what's hidden right next to you.

Maybe there's a homeless person on the side.

They're on the same route, but are they seeing the same things I'm seeing?

Are they seeing the same affordances?

Are they seeing what's, you know, and often that route is where the vantage point is.

So what's behind that wall on the right?

What's hidden from the time that we see these buildings?

And I think that's an interesting question of, you know, there's the system as seen from a perspective, and then there's what it's really like in many different contexts.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Stephen.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, which brings me to the Sagrada Familia, which to me, standing beside it, sticks out and up and all over the place and has

allusions to termite mounds and, and, and, and like, it's one of those attempts, I think, to actually mimic the things that we nature.

And it certainly is solenoidal and ramping.

I mean, it's, if you want an example of where architecture is actually doing a symbolic, how do you do, the Sagrada Familia would be a perfect example of that.

terms of what it in terms of what about active inference some of the some of the shapes we see kicking out from some of the math that's happening in the on the in the statistical mechanics so that's kind of fascinating too hmm you know what you mentioned okay a few um you know little references since we're in the fun dot two there we go spiral so the tower of babel


SPEAKER_03:
whether or whatever it was, it's often at least classically represented as a spiral ascent.

So that's very interesting that it's not like the Tower of Pisa with just rings.

That's like iso contours that are separated from each other.

But there's something about the way that it's classically shown that makes it look more like it's a spiral, which is, as we've discussed from a technical perspective,

related to the decomposition of that spiral into an uphill irrotational component and then a purely rotational component and then the other sort of reference was to william blake's poem london where he says i wander through each chartered street near where the chartered tames does flow and mark in every face i meet marks of weakness marks of woe

So here there's so much about how the streets are chartered, the flow of people and the river is chartered because it's also part of the niche that's been engineered.

And there's also flow, which brings us back to number 32.

That was our big lead in was flow.

What is flow and how can different systems

have similar mappings of heat flow, information flow, bulk flow, particle flow, liquid flow.

So how does flow matter in a city?

The sewage going out and the resources coming in.

And then also it's like even niche modification on our countenance.

It's marked on the faces that Blake is meeting.

aspects of the city are kind of imprinted on them.

And then that speaks to what Dean was saying about how there's like a collective feeling that's partially architectural, but it's like a feedback that's complex between the people and the time and the place.

So Dean, then Stephen.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and it's interesting too, because the artifacts part of this, whether it's a cathedral or whatever the artifacts are that get kicked out,

we can look at that from an ingredient standpoint.

Like we can look at beer as having water and yeast and barley and, and whatever.


SPEAKER_00:
Right.


SPEAKER_01:
But, but the fact is there's also time required and there's also energy that has to be applied.

And I think that's the part, the time and the energy piece of city States that are

are the real key to whether or not we can see what, as individuals, we perceive active inference as affording versus what, on a collective level, we see active inference as affording.

I think where it separates is on the specifics of the ingredients, but where the common is is in terms of the energy applied and the time required.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, with the idea of the time and energy, and we're talking about scale, you know, when you're around the Thames, I mean, back in the day, there was that big, there was a boat full of

important people, I don't know if they were royalty or politicians or whatever, but they were on the Thames and the boat kind of sank, and the people in the water.

And because the water was so putrid and rank that a lot of them died, basically.

And that instigated a lot of the clean-up.

So I suppose there's this question of how close is close?

You get closer to water, and at some point you put your head in it, you can't really make anything out apart from water.

Then you've got certain vantage points which allow you to understand that you're in a chart of 10s.

You get so close you could be in any body of water.

And then you move out further.

So there's a scale dependency in terms of how you can structurally relate to the information.

And then just whether you like it, there's a structurally dependent nature of the scale of the Thames, right?

So I can't walk across the Thames because it's too small compared to, say, a small stream.

So these are some of the questions in terms of how the information is going to be processed

And how much of that information is adjacent to someone and how much of it's hidden?

Because those people on that boat, they lived next to a smelly Thames for a long time.

Actually, the people in the House of Commons used to have scented handkerchiefs they'd put up to their nose so that they could overcome the smell of the sewage in the Thames, right?

And so, you know, at some point they got up close and dirty to it and probably changed their perception of what was really going on.


SPEAKER_03:
Interesting.

So another thing I had written down and kind of connecting us to some of the core terms in Act-Inf, affordance, which is the capacity for action.

And those are the opportunities for policy selection.

They're chosen amongst the different affordances.

And in cities, it's very related to ability and access.

So two people who are walking down the street are able to enter different doors and they're able to sit down in different places.

And so I think that's a very tangible and important example of embodied, extended, and cultured, et cetera, cognition, all the E's and other letters, because it's something that we all experience.

They're issues that people really care about.

And

putting them under a descriptive, I hesitate to say neutral banner of affordances, financial affordances or physical or however it may be, it helps us

have a discussion about what the affordances should be.

Should you be able to get into the bus, in the back of the bus?

There's trade-offs with that.

Maybe it's harder to clock the fares, but then it might be easier to access for some people, but then now there's this ability for people to evade the fare, but then how bad is that relative to the buses being late?

If everybody has to go in the front, all of these kinds of trade-offs,

Active inference is giving a way to talk about the agentic level, the individual person on the streets of the city and their perception, cognition, and action, which are selected from their affordances, which are situational, not just like all people can go up a staircase.

And then we have a individual level model and can ask then, okay, collective model, feedback with a niche,

avel's paper takes it is like the city and the state as active inference agents composed of subunit active inference agents just like we can have an active model of a body as well as of the cells steven yeah i'll be curious what your thoughts are on this daniel in terms of


SPEAKER_04:
when when we have the active inference models like we mentioned they're often you know particular low dimensional ways to get into sort of types of regimes of attention you know so maybe it's going to model the nature of people you know looking at this their their attentional states x y and z and because the challenge is once you go and you start walking through different doors and you're in a town

you've got this question about how do you model that when the actual low dimensionality becomes very hard to work with?

And I suppose that question then is at what point do you look at what actual people are doing

which hasn't happened as much in active inference and then try and go back and try and understand okay what is what they've done and how that's inscribed on the niche reflective of the action policies and versus how much is it about looking at the sensorium that might explain the generative model that we anticipate going on and emulating that and say that might relate to i suppose you might have that same question with ants you know when do you try and

do an agent-based model of a few ants as a conceptual, and when do you try and understand what ants are doing in situ?

Because obviously that gets kind of complex, right, because they're all moving around.

So I don't know if that has a correlation to that question in that field as well, but I think that relates here to this situated cityscape scale, because it's very granular once you get into that

and in some ways that it's nice to make it become like a mind it's nice to make all of that because suddenly it it kind of fits in with the modeling that we kind of use right and in some ways it might so there may be some validity but that it may be that that we have to bring in that mind body environment dynamical mess um that opens some questions about well how do we go about that


SPEAKER_03:
Good question.

So here on this slide, we have the dimensionality of ACT-INF models.

So we can even just emphasize maps, not territories.

And then what does the next step in formalizing this model look like?

So let's think of a specific city situation, and then we can talk about like modeling that city situation and what would the dimensionality of the model be?

Where does regime of attention come into play?

So what would be like a city situation

common situation fringe situation important situation like what's a case that we care about in a city maybe one that involves complex interactions between for example bureaucracy which was the main topic of the paper and legacy history and affordances of agents dean


SPEAKER_01:
I think to get there, you'd have to have a lot more of the bottom-up aspect of that being honoured as opposed to more of the top-down control piece.

I don't know what the final product would look like because it's active inference.

I would be inferring and I would think that there would be 13 million architects and one citizen.

which is not how cities are typically designed.

And that's one of the struggles that I have with this in terms of drawing a parallel across scales.

There's only one of me, but I've got however many neurons, and I'm kind of dependent on those, so.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, yes, I see where you're going and I think we're gonna keep the bottom up and top down.

And I think this modeling approach, it's not the only one, but starting with a scenario and kind of like Bruno Latour's Actor Network Theory or ANT appropriately, we can start by identifying traces and action trajectories in that scenario.

And let's see if in a bottom-up way, on our first pass, we can get to like a skeletal act-inf model.

And then the iteration is infinite slash perpetual.

So I don't think it's about just going for one, getting bottom-up input once, and then...

laying the grid work down, and then Procrustes from there on.

It's an iterated process.

And this is how we start from the bottom.

So we're going to kind of like start from the bottom up of a scenario that's real, that describes subject, verb, object that people will recognize.

Person gets on bus.

And then let's think about what active core terms we would want to

apply to different nodes, recognizing that even the assignment of internal, external blanket states, it's conditional on our model.

It's not like the door is a blanket state outside of us modeling it a certain way.

And certainly we know external and internal are that way as well.

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
And this question of modeling, of course, this is where the niche and how much the niche can come in.

I think one of the things, if we're taking more modern societies, I mean, certainly more recently, is there's been an increasing role of this top-down or what I call literally copy and paste.

I mean, in Canada, they've got something called Shopper's Drug Mart.

They've got these kind of stores now.

And having worked in some...

like agencies, graphic agencies, is I can just imagine that there's like a design for a store, it gets tweaked, and it literally, and this couldn't have really happened in the past, it literally gets copied and pasted.

And it looks like it.

It looks like, oh, here's another shop that's another drugstore, but more like a chain, a franchise.

McDonald's is a classic case, I suppose.

There's some adaptation, but it's pretty much like plonk, plonk,

And in some ways, it's kind of devoid from active inference.

And that may be part of the problem is the more that it's done that way and the less that there's kind of an, even in the top down, there's not really even an inference process going on there anymore.

It's like, what are we gonna do?

I'm just gonna copy and paste using a machine, something that was done elsewhere.

It's not even contextualized from the top down anymore.

We're just completely bulldoze whatever we need to make it fit.


SPEAKER_03:
agree that that's the franchise model, which allows for rapid deployment, for example.

And then on the other side, from the user's perspective, maybe walking into a franchise is comforting.

And there is a reduction of uncertainty about aisle seven is where the serials are.

Oh, wow.

I was right.

They're actually there, even though I've never been in this city before.

And so that is definitely a evolutionarily novel context to have that level of precision of like what you'll find somewhere you've never been, but it allows for increasingly globally accessible reduction of surprise.

And maybe we're seeing that the reduction of uncertainty of what is there and the quality and how many grams are gonna be in that box and the profit margins of everybody down the line,

That system in many cases displaces the hand shoveling of granola and every little co-op having its own granola blend.

And these are definitely scenarios that can be modeled with Active Inference.

Dave and then Steve.


SPEAKER_00:
yeah the cut and paste mentality for corporate decision making in particular is really destructive uh the single biggest determinant for where you're going to locate a new business if you're a corporation either putting in your own outlets doing franchising is

Is there lots of competition?

If there's lots of competition, that's the location I want.

So you've got all these outlets competing with each other when, you know, across town, there's this whole underserved area where everybody would be happy, including your employees and your stock owners.

I've seen this in when a Walmart came into my old town.

The one big draw that would send people to the Kmart is Kmart had not changed any of their layouts for decades, so all the little old ladies who had trouble remembering where they lived could still find the granola.

So what happens when Walmart opens up across the street?

Well, they went in, reorganized Kmart and all the little old lady says, well, if there's no reason to go to Kmart anymore, I might as well save a few cents at Walmart.


SPEAKER_03:
And again, on the first pass, it's like.

but where there's less access to that thing.

But you go, well, I already know people are shopping here and now I can draw people who are shopping and people who are new.

It makes dollars, doesn't make sense.

What do they say?

Steven?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, this question about how to deal with the niche is a massive, massive challenge, you know, because the...

The bottom-up ability to self-organise, once that's lost, you're now in a different regime.

You've lost something and it becomes...

it becomes augmented by these other, because it's not even like we say that someone, we look, they don't necessarily look like if I was in a town, I might look where people are shopping, but actually what's happened is they're looking at the outputs of some metrics, which tells someone at head office, the, the, the key performance indicators.

from which they can algorithmically make some decisions.

And it all starts to roll out.

And one of the things that does mean, the initial stage is with, say, food, like one reason for, say, oh, why would I go to McDonald's?

Like, well, at least they think they wash, they don't know it, but by washing everything in ammonia or by, basically, by things always not having E. coli.

which is not an incidental thing in some areas.

So you'd go there and it's like, it becomes like this will never fall below a certain standards.

That's what their main thing is.

We've got buckets and buckets of disinfectant around the back.

So you're never gonna have to worry about any of the equipment, blah, blah, blah.

But of course the downside of that is that you get into this vicious cycle of mechanization, which suits that kind of producer.


SPEAKER_03:
That reminds me a lot of our discussions with Stephen Fox, I think in 27, about industrial engineering.

And before Dean could even reload, there was the craft dimension.

And it was about the integration of craft and industry and how just bringing up, here's the tolerable limits.

Like that doesn't mean that you're going to take it to some extreme over-mechanicized level.

way but balancing those two i just want to return to a specific scenario particular scenario in a city that will help us extend and connect to the paper and then we're going to go through some of the terms and actually just stay with one model and look at

What does an active inference model of a city look like?

Some people may read Serval's paper and then think, okay, it was prose.

I didn't see a figure.

I didn't see an equation.

I didn't see an example.

So what are we going to do to actually connect this to my local public transit planner or this grant that we have in this area?

Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
We could use an example helping to connect people, connect across age and culture, and using public spaces and internet access.

So using actually the project we're just looking at the moment, we're putting in a Wi-Fi mesh in a community, a sort of a newcomer community, relatively low income.

There's questions about, okay, do you bring in resources so that people get more stuff at home?

And then how much of that stuff at home is enough to leverage something outside of just consuming?

How does that then leverage resources?

doing something with it back in the community, making it something that extends the niche.

Things like Meetup, I think that's a familiar platform, which has been quite useful for people to self-organize.

So we see this ability to do that through the internet, but of course,

Well, what's the ability to do that in real life as well?

Like the coffee shops, the cafes, you know?

So, you know, you know, anyways.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Let's pick a, we can do like a meetup, you know, planned or unplanned meetup at a certain spot, but let's pick like a very specific scenario where somebody can say, I haven't seen that be modeled this way.

There are new ways that we can now, uh,

talk about that scenario.

So brought up many important areas like connecting across ages and cultures, et cetera.

So let's think of some public space like we could do.


SPEAKER_04:
A cafe adjacent to a park.

Let's say that.

And we know that that might be relating to other cafes.

We should say if there's this cafe next to a park and how does that relate to

you know, getting a coffee, but obviously, it's not just about getting a coffee, is it?

But there's an interesting, yeah, what does that relate to the niche?

So we're going to talk about this.

So how does that relate to the niche, the ability to have action policies, the ability to serve service needs?

Yes, also service wants and loves.

So actually, actually, one thing that you might find an interesting in

In the development world, when they're trying to look at more complex contexts, you've got needs, wants, and loves.

What needs to happen?

What would I want to happen?

What would I love to happen?

And often what would I love to happen is actually more generative.

Often everyone wants to talk of the needs, right?

I need to get a cup of coffee.

Okay, here you go.

I need, what's your needs now?

I need a drink.

Okay, here you go.

And it's kind of stuck, right?

Well, what do you want?

What would you love?

And that's kind of what humans have a role in.

We're not a machine that needs filling in from one end.

So I wonder what your thoughts are in terms of how that, what sort of cafe should we think of?

Because we're all gonna have a different cafe in our minds here, right?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, I agree.

It shouldn't be like the cafe in my little town on this corner.

So we're going to talk about a cafe adjacent to the park.

Also, Dave, thanks for the cool sumo references in the live chat.

I think that's an example of how you can scaffold and use ontology as a thought pump and explore formal, dance towards the formal, and then back towards the qualitative.

So it's a cafe adjacent to a park.

we're not describing the territory.

That would be like a Borges horror novella where we're trying to describe to the atomic level, you know, the paint coating on the streetlight.

So, dispense.

We're doing a human-centric model.

Maybe there are assistant animals, but

we're going to build up the model.

And that's why we're discussing this on the slide with dimensionality.

So what's the dimensionality of a cafe next to a park?

I mean, the question barely makes sense.

You could have a parameter in your state space for every molecule of air, but we're talking about a communicable simple model that might be on some sort of Pareto optimal front, Bayes optimal front of accuracy and complexity.

So it's like,

can't explain this to the local politician in a third of a second but three minutes is probably too much so we're going to find some communicable level of detail and make a use-oriented active skeleton and then see where that takes us dean so this is a i'm asking this question because i don't really know if we've got a cafe adjacent to a park are we having some kind of a


SPEAKER_01:
Are we assuming some kind of a compounded sense around what is an attractor state here?


SPEAKER_03:
So it's a great question, like dwell times, like maybe there's some transition frequency from the cafe, you know, from non locations that we're not even discussing.

It's not the whole world.

This is our map.

It's just a little map.

into the cafe and then from the park to the cafe.

And then there's like the ingress and egress of the park and then its relationship.

So we could even start to think about like nodes and edges that are connecting the location of a person.

Stephen, and then we'll start working through the list or feel free to say any of those terms.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, I think as Dean mentioned, I was thinking about like the non-equilibrium steady state is, so maybe we need to think

Okay, you've got a cafe adjacent to a park.

Okay, so like you say, you could be, what's the non-equilibrium steady state of that grass, if there's grass on the edge of the park, right?

Or what's the non-equilibrium steady state for the behavior setting?

Actually, there's some really interesting work that Harry Heft does with behavior settings.

So maybe that could be another, so that, and of course,

we'd have to see what scale.

So again, what sort of scale is friendly to this kind of question?

If the behavior setting gives us kind of an idea of the niche, almost, as is capitulated by each person.

And of course, this is where the challenge is in terms of, if I'm gonna be taking the sensory state perspective, I kind of have to take an agent


SPEAKER_03:
Yes, there's no sense state outside of a specifically defined agent.

Which agent are we going to be looking at?

Should we take the barista?


SPEAKER_04:
Do you want to take the barista?

That might be easier.


SPEAKER_03:
Look, let's just do human.

Okay, human.

So these are people who we're talking about.

There's other entities.

There could be drones flying around.

For sure, there's ants.

There's all kinds of stuff happening in the territory, allegedly.

But we're going to be making a reduced dimensionality model

Maybe one that has low computational overhead, or maybe one that's easy to communicate, or one that explains a lot of variance but not every single nook and cranny.

So we're going to be talking about humans in the cafe adjacent to the park in a city.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
So if we're looking at this through the lens of active inference, there's two things now that have been raised.

One is, do we have an attractor state?

And meaning, will people migrate?

Will they move?

Will they congregate?

Will they gather?

And then Stephen brings up the idea of, okay, so how do people remain in that non-equilibrium steady state?

How does the expectation now get realized once the migration has occurred?

This is what an action and active inference working together allows for.

Something gets kicked out at the end, right?

some material thing with ingredients that we can now account for gets kicked out at the end.

But in the meantime, what we have to do is we have to actually look, will people gather?

Is this actually a place that people will now move towards?

And then, because that's a city, right?

They've all congregated.

And then we have to ask is, will expectations meet intentions?

That's what going through an active inference process actually affords.

It doesn't guarantee, as you said, Daniel, it doesn't guarantee the specifics and the particulars.

What it does is it holds up on a more abstracted level for a longer period of time before energy is actually applied, before something actually materializes.

And I think that's what messes people up because there isn't a critical path

ready to be fulfilled.

It's an active inference process that has to have certain anchors in the ground before you can, before an anchor is meaning abstract that you have to have available that act as affordances that eventually kick out the blueprint, which eventually kicks out the dwelling, the edifice.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks, Stephen.


SPEAKER_04:
and so you've got this kind of broader dynamic so we've got again so resolving scales again so it comes in because could like there's going to be at the broad level customers and someone serving in the cafe right um starbucks calls them a barista right to tie in with that vibe but

So they've got a different teleological expectation, even in the abstract.

We haven't even worked out who they are, right?

Now, of course, that's not quite so true if one of the customers is an adult with a three-year-old child, right?

The three-year-old child's expectations are slightly different in terms of what it is to go in there.

So you've got this, but essentially speaking, there's a regime of behavior that each of them are teleologically attuned to, to some extent.


SPEAKER_03:
Let's go through these terms in this order, and there's a specific reason why.

So affordances are capacities for action.

They're what actions are selected from.

Yes, they're ecological, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

Which affordances will we put in our model?

So taking out a phone of your pocket, it's an affordance, but is that the model that we're making?

So again, not the dimensionality of the territory, but what is our model?

Are we interested in treating the person like a blob and the affordance is literal, just go to the park or leave the scene?

And so we can have a simple matrix.

Are you going to be in the three by three matrix?

Are you going to be in the cafe, in the park, or neither?

With a transition on the off diagonal and the diagonal would be your dwell time.

So that is like, the person is just like a point.

Okay.

Also affordances can be zoomed in and a lot more granular.

The affordances could be the angle of every joint in the person's body.

And that might be relevant if the steps are going up to the cafe and someone doesn't have a joint mobility to raise up their leg a certain level, then that is going to influence their transition movement matrix.

So when we coarse grain to just the blob and the three by three transition matrix, which is simple,

that may abstract above important layers.

So that's why iterated modeling is really important, but iterating means we need to have something there to iterate on.

So for a first pass, do we want to do a model of movements?

of the people amongst the different spaces.

So that would be like one example.

Another example would be like, we're interested in drinking behavior.

So the affordance that we're going to model is the choice of no drink, coffee, tea, smoothie.

So we're making a kind of behavioral economic model and actually we're not as interested in the movements

transitions, we're interested in how the niche, the temperature, influences people's buying habits.

Or we could have both.

We could have where they are as a blob and what drink they buy.

Or we could have where they are and all their joints and what drink they buy and them looking at the phone.

That's the dimensionality of the model.

It's not the dimensionality of the territory because we're still talking about the same place.

So what kind of affordances do we want to focus on?

Like we know that you could go, anything a person could do is going to be an affordance.

But what affordances are we going to be talking about here?


SPEAKER_04:
I quite like the idea of working with the where, the where-ness.

I think there's a lot of tendency for what personal orders, what the thing is,

sort of thing that you can in some ways potentially emulate in a lab i don't think you can emulate the awareness in a lab like so what sort of zones might they occupy like there's this around tables there's around the doorway so it could be

You know, you've got these, yeah, you've got the park.

So even more broadly, yeah, maybe a very broad level, there's the cafe, there's the park.

And then that can then break down by some zones or maybe they fall out from the model, you know?

But yeah.


SPEAKER_03:
So these, this is going to be fun because I'll just do it.

So the diagonals of the matrix, this is like a movement matrix.

So the stay is the number could be like zero to one, the probability in the next hour or the next minute.

It's not an absolute disclaim.

It's time dependent.

And then you could imagine within staying at the cafe that

we could make another little matrix that had the table, the bathroom, the counter, but it would be only and strictly within that top left cell.

That's the sub matrices that we were looking at in number 32.

So we're going to be in a state and that's what coarse graining means.

Someone can't look at our matrix and say, how could you not have modeled the counter in the bathroom when people have different... Great.

We made a three by three matrix.

Now let's make a submatrix and let's make that fine grained.

And that submatrix could be defined in terms of Kronos.

Like what is your coordinates in the cafe?

Three comma four.

Or it could be Kairos.

They're at the counter or they're...

doing something spatially, but we're not putting a number on it.

So staying is the on diagonal, because we're making a coarse grained movement model.

We're not looking at their elbow angle.

We're not looking at where they are inside the park.

This is a first iteration of a model.

And then if there was surprise coming from our model, discrepancies with the observations,

just like Act-Inf, we could update our model.

But again, iteration entails that we need a complete model before there's anything to discuss.

If people are just throwing out random core terms and terms outside of the Act-Inf ontology, it's part of a discussion, but we're not iterating on a model.

So it's fine, but that's not making an active inference model.

Dean, and then we'll continue.


SPEAKER_01:
So I like this because materialization piece now what gets kicked out is on a gradient descent.

But my question again then is, so when you're talking about affordance, are you including availability, as in what Stephen was talking about, because of where I am, now things are at hand, are proximal, or are you talking about threshold lowering, meaning ease,

at which something can be attained because they're not they're not the same thing and i want to know whether or not we're including both in terms of crystallizing this materialization stephen and then we'll come to that yeah this is helpful like i think it's good this idea of drilling down


SPEAKER_04:
And I suppose this is this extra question, maybe it's at the side there, but is how much does the nature of things change by being in the cafe?

By staying in one location,

or move in between locations, there's that question about this kind of, I suppose it's this kind of fluidity, right?

And that's an interesting side question, which- We can put it in our model.


SPEAKER_03:
We'll be able to actually iterate on that question.

And I'd argue this isn't drilling down, this is building up.

There's nothing to drill into until we have this fully described.

Otherwise it's just like two people are, you can't drill into a linear model that hasn't been specified.

So there is no drilling down until we're talking about something particular.

And then we could coarse grain or we could fine grain or we could iterate or elaborate or transpose.

But we're at the zero to one step in act-inf modeling here.

Dave?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, and making those transitions actually changes the inventory of potential affordances of other participants.

When you walk into a room, you give every person in that room seconds to either greet you and establish a potential relationship or to say, oh, this guy doesn't want to talk to me or he would have nodded.

Urban Goffman goes into painful detail on how that stuff works.

And that one relationship can persist for years.

The guy you nod to and the guy you never to, do you nod up or do you nod down?


SPEAKER_03:
And it's very personalized and cultural.

And that's definitely like a level that we, we haven't even gotten into the inter agentic, but we can, we'll, we'll get there.

And we can see, is this part of our zero to one model or is that gonna be included in our one to two model?

But repeatedly returning to, not saying it's a bad thing, but just repeatedly returning to aspects of the territory before we have a model to iterate on, the model is gonna remain uncompleted and you'll have done a partial inventory of a territory in a totally ad hoc pseudo linear way

when it could have been all there and iterated using our ontology and framework, which we're here to work on.

Dean, then Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, so Daniel, maybe you can help me because I say, when I think about this, the availability piece, because it's proximal, doesn't mean that it's not on a high shelf

meaning high threshold and I can't get the coffee bag down that's full of the beans, right?

So again, I like what we're doing here, but I still ask when we're talking about affordances, are we looking at two ways of describing that at a minimum?

Because that's what I'm hoping we're doing, but if we're not, what are we doing?


SPEAKER_03:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_01:
You were going to give me some thoughts around that.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, first, Stephen, with a raised hand.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, that got me thinking now.

The question I suppose is as well, as well as iterating on, you know, we can run multiple examples of, so it might be one of these cases, like you say, many things can happen, but you could run, you know, you could have two or three types of models that are kind of simple and you run them all many times and see, okay, and maybe change certain parameters to make something more likely that there's a long-term relationship, that there's a potential binding energy that kind of

is exhibited.

And then you can sort of look for clusters of transitions, clusters of behavioural patterns, right?

And so then we're sort of comparing patterns.

And at some level, then it's in a way becomes a sense making process for us.

And the advantages we've got is we can tap back into our embodiment, because we're humans.

So we can say, okay, seeing that, what sense do I bring a higher dimension to all of that?


SPEAKER_03:
Yep.

You could have 500 groups of three separate and make their own active model of a cafe adjacent to a park.

But they all have to get that zero to one.

Otherwise, if they come together, what is there to discuss?

500 times zero.

Zero.


SPEAKER_04:
Well, I wasn't so much thinking about different people.

I'm thinking even us, say the person who does the model, you just literally...


SPEAKER_03:
run it lots of times but with slightly different tweaks and then so you get you you can sort of get something from that i would say that's a different type of maybe you start to see some of these patterns that's iterated modeling with getting the first version and then changing parameters and iterating and then looking for patterns across iterations that are achieved via a certain strategy of changing parameters but incomplete model will never run so

Yes, there's a total space to do stochastic simulation and run one model 5,000 times and 5,000 different models one time and every other combination.

They all are predicated on iterating on something that already is there.

And so that's the zero to one phase, Dave.


SPEAKER_00:
I was puzzled how you translate the stories that you find in so many academic papers, or semi-academic papers.

Sociologists are great at this.

They'll say, this happens, this happens.

How do you turn that into sumo?

Very simple.

Exists.

Exists person, person enters room, and, and, and.

and you throw it in the model, and if it says contradiction, something's wrong.

If you're really confident that, hey, that's the way the real world goes, you negate it, you throw a does not exist, and you got a universal, and run it, and it blows up, and you say, oh, I guess not everybody does.

What I said is wrong.

Let's find out what I did wrong.

Cool stuff.

You don't even need the exotic.

You don't even need to recreate things.


SPEAKER_03:
um mathematically oriented modeling tools you can just do it in pure yes or no true or false logic just realized that this morning and my head lit up nice um yeah take people at their work just use their word and they asserted that this and then i hope they used nouns and verbs

And if so, then you could be able to parse it.

So let's, we're making a coarse grained movement model.

So again, it could be fine step.

You could have the affordance be to take a step and the location to be something else fine grained, but we're taking a coarse grain.

Now we're going to talk about the sense of the agents.

So their actions are their movements, which is just a coarse grain movement state.

That's the actions that they're doing inference on.

what are their perceptions we know about the 5 11 55 senses it's not about the scent of coffee in this model again the future model with which thing they bought you could go to what is their sense of smell but here we're just going to do a sense mapping matrix with light

Okay, so the cafe is gonna have red light.

I love red light.

So the cafe is going to have basically a 80% chance of red light if you're in the dark room, a 0.2 chance of sunlight if you're at the window seat and it's never dark.

If you're in the park, there's a 100% chance of it being sunlight.

There's no red light in the park.

and there's no darkness in the park.

So it's like the daytime.

So again, that's iterating.

So it's good to keep those things in mind and like have a coda or a space where you could have everyone's perspective added even when you're building the first iteration.

But some matrices do need to be specified to continue talking about it as an active inference model.

And then neither, we'll say neither, it's never red.

This is a rare red light that the cafe uses.

and it's half the time sunny and it's half the time dark because that's who knows we just have maximal uncertainty but we know that it's not red okay so this is how the a matrix in active inference if you said you're in a dark room where are you well here given these simple numbers we know that we're in neither the cafe or the park if you said you're in a red light

where are you you must be in the cafe it's the only place with a red light if you said you're in the sun what is the probability that you're in the park it's two-thirds roughly this is 1.7 and so it's 1 divided by 1.7 is literally the probability of being in the park conditioned on seeing sun

So that is Bayesian statistics.

It's like, we have a matrix of sensory mappings, and then it's like, here's a new observation.

It's red.

You go, okay, it's 0.8 over 0.8 that I'm in the cafe.

Okay, so that is the sense mapping matrix.

What is the inference on?

What is the S, the hidden state?

Where am I?

That's not directly observed.

you're observing only the photons in this model.

So this is a mapping between the O, the observations, and then the S, the states that inference is being done on.

But aren't they thinking about their to-do list?

Yes.

in the territory keep it in mind add a note add a comment we want to hear your perspective that's not the coarse grain movement model so these are active memes for simplifying teams okay we have the perception which is the sense here it's three states and we have the locations that inference is being done on now we can talk about preferences what are preferences for

This is like perceptual control theory.

Preferences are over observations.

So it's like the preference is to observe the body being in homeostasis.

That's part of the preference specification in ACT-INF.

So one could imagine that if somebody had no preference for any of the... I don't really care.

Then...

they would move proportionally to the ratio of the transitions of the affordance matrix.

So if all the transition frequencies were even and there was no preference over sensory outcomes, you would be evenly distributed.

If there is a preference for darkness, no matter how slight, and there's any ability to move into the neither, then that will be the attractor.

because individuals will dwell in a more preferred state because they prefer the darkness, which is only accessed here.

If there's a preference strong, then you exaggerate it.

Like a strong preference for sun, we would see like everyone or almost everyone in the park.

A weak preference for sun would only slightly bias towards the park.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I think I'm asking, should we assume that the preference is to be verdantly caffeinated or caffeinatedly verdant?

And I'm not being a smart apple.

I'm asking that, is that the assumption that we're building our model around?


SPEAKER_03:
Because you asked.

Here's the interesting thing about this model as we're building it in the first iteration.

The sense is visual.

So there's no coffee in this model.

No, I know, but why isn't there?

Right.

So if we could talk about a different affordance matrix, a different sense mapping, it could be interoception.

It could be, am I excited or not?

And then do I prefer to be excited or relaxed?

So just two interoceptive states.

Then there's an affordance, which is to drink coffee or not, which is to have some probability of moving you from one state to another, okay?

Coffee is increasing your likelihood of getting excited versus not, doesn't.

That is not a spatial model.

So now we could make that preference over caffeination states

And that's like a module that's going to compose very interoperably with the spatial model because the affordance vector, the sense vectors, those can be heterogeneous.

That can be, here's the three by three spatial and the two by two caffeine.

And those are sub matrices.

And it does turn out that the cafe is where that affordance is enabled.

And there isn't the affordance for the coffee in here in the park.

But those are two types of...

observations.

There's the photon observation, which we're using as a proxy for location.

And then there'd be the interoception, which is related to the caffeination state.

And then those could be combined and you could have a joint density over caffeination and location.

And then policies like where to move could be selected based upon the long-term expected free energy, given the preferences and affordances of that agent.

So there are different modules that can be composed in an integrative modeling framework for perception, action, and cognition.

Hashtag active inference.

Dean, and then Steven.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, just real quickly, I was going to say, I was going to answer my own question.

I think then in terms of a preference confirmation, the iconography on the side of the cup would seem to fit within the niche as well.

So maybe it's a large acacia tree in green.

So I wasn't saying it in the sense that we were... I don't want to drag this off course.

I want to actually reinforce the idea of how preferences align as opposed to saying, why aren't we including that?

I'm kind of reinforcing the sense mapping matrix.

Thanks.


SPEAKER_03:
Stephen?


SPEAKER_04:
Hello?

Yeah.

I suppose one thing I'd like to check in with, though, as we're just doing this, take a little bit of a breath, is you've kind of got the deontics, you've kind of got the deontic cues, you've kind of got the, okay, I can make a choice between the affordances for action.

So it's sort of coming slightly from a more deductive kind of script approach.

triggering world, which is useful.

I'm also wondering, there could be, say for instance, that sense mapping matrix, as well as it being something that links someone's preferences back to where they go more broadly.

So that's quite useful.

But I'm wondering also, if someone's navigating a space,

And maybe within the cafe, there's some red, there's some sun, there's some dark.

I know you talked about embedding, but there's a question about, is there a tendency to move towards deontic type of structuring because it kind of takes us there?

And if there was to be a kind of a more gradient based transition that's happening in relation to the space, it might be a different, you know, how much does this adapt to that?

Or does it need to be rethought in terms of the type of modeling?


SPEAKER_03:
Okay, so this is a coarse-grained model.

So to say that it's 0.8 red in the cafe and 0.2 in sun in the cafe corresponds to 20% of the locations have sunlight on them.

So one could then make a sub-model where at table one, it's 100% sunny.

So you're still in the sub-matrix that coarse-grains to 80-20.

But there's two tables that are in the sun and then there's eight that are in the red.

So then you would have affordance matrix within the cafe sub matrix of moving of a 10 by 10 tables.

But one can see that as you include more rows in the matrix, you get exponential explosion and that,

proposes computational challenges and just like parameter identification challenges.

Cause maybe you never saw someone go from seven to two, but it's not that it can't happen.

It just, there's only 80 people who went to the shop and there's a hundred transitions.

So it just, you're not gonna see all them.

So then you get a very poor estimate of a hundred parameters.

that's why we're talking about modeling not what is happening in the territory this is going to give you some coarse grain results then the sense mapping matrix is preference free it is not a preference matrix the preference matrix c is where the preferences are specified over sensory outcomes only

So here's Dean who has like a nine to three of red over sun.

Now Dave has 1.1 to one.

So they both prefer red over sun, but we can see, and in the model stream one, Ryan Smith and Christopher White, we talked about like what these numbers mean, their ratio, their absolute amount, et cetera.

So we're not gonna talk about it here, but Dean has a stronger preference for red over sun, whereas Dave has a weak preference for red over sun.

Okay, so we have the preferences over the observations.

Okay, we have the affordances, coarse-grained movement, not the elbow motion, not which table, coarse-grained movement.

We know that we could make a submatrix.

Then there's the action states, which is moving from one to another.

Then there's perceptions.

The observations, the sense states, those are photons, not location.

but there's a matrix.

Now that could be a fixed matrix or it could be learnt, but we're just starting with a fixed matrix.

We have preferences over observations.

Those are only over colors of light.

And so for Dean, it's just a vector of three, but we're just contrasting two different agents that are in this cafe area.

Then we have expectations.

So expectations are the generative model, what would be expected observations.

And so Dean says, I'm the kind of person who expects and prefers red a lot.

That will shape which of these affordances are taken.

And so Dave and Dean can have the same sense mapping matrix

They don't differ in how they infer where they are given the photons, but the affordances can also be the same and they'll have different behavior.

So that's how you get agent specific behavior from a model like this.

You could have agents with the same preference, but they differ in affordances or some other combination that's iterating and enriching a model.

And then just one thing here before we go to the question, Steven.

So what is the niche?

So yes, again, the territory, we think everything, it's just everything in the world, but the niche is the generative process.

So the agent is the generative model.

And the niche is the generative process that's actually like handing those observations to the agent.

In this case, it's just the emission of photons.

It's literally just the light source is the niche because we're making a super simple model where the only observation that's getting handed from the niche is photon.

So the only thing we need to say for the niche is it's the process, the hidden process that emits photons.

Maybe it's a red light bulb, maybe it's red cellophane and it's white light, or that's the hidden generative process.

The niche in this case is just the process that emits observations to the agent so that they can then integrate that into their generative model.

Stephen, did you want to?


SPEAKER_04:
yeah yeah i think i mean rather than necessarily emission of photons you could say it's like the perception of light because it could be the niche is not a perception the agent perceives the observation of light but the niche is the process that gives rise to agents observations right okay if you take it from but the the red red is not photons that's the perception of

state yeah without getting into what is red do we all see the same red we're talking about the mapping between the perception of what is called an english red and the location state and the location state no exactly and so you then got well two questions one question do you know the list you've got nine three zero as opposed to it doesn't so how do you scale that like would you you don't do it so they always number one is the highest and it's a you've actually gone above one there so is that they use a different how would you scale what the maximum is in that


SPEAKER_03:
So this is what we talked about in model stream one with Ryan Smith, but basically these numbers do get normalized to sum to one to be a proper probability.

in a softmax function.

Oh, I see.


SPEAKER_04:
So it just sums them all up and then, yeah, sums them all up.


SPEAKER_03:
That's how you get the probability proper from this, but then the ability to have it go beyond just one.

So that's the difference between five and one versus 50 and 10.

Depending on the generative model, those might behave very, very differently.


SPEAKER_01:
yeah this first of all this is fantastic to build it in real time but i want to just now ask a question so so and then in real terms we built this model and it kind of makes us aware of things that we maybe wouldn't be aware of because we weren't in the active inference realm but now my question is so so now

Is this also projectional?

What kind of inferences do we make off of this in terms of agents go, don't go?

Because to me, then, that's when the real value is realized because we can't predict with certainty who goes and who doesn't, who ends up at the cafe with the coffee and who stays at home and watches TV.

Friends, right?

Like, so how, so we've got this, this is fantastic.

But now we want to get to a place where a person who normally would be somewhat risk averse takes this and goes, oh my goodness, this opened up something that I would normally never have gone.

But now I'm prepared to go.

Does it help?

Do you think this work helps that person?

just off the top of your head?

Because I know it helps me, helps you, but that person who is trying to do this on that decision branch moment, how does making them aware of this alter their thinking?


SPEAKER_03:
I think it does a few things, some of which we've seen in the past few minutes, others which probably remain to be explored.

It separates out

observations from the state that's being inferred.

Because it'd be very easy just to simply say, well, I prefer the cafe.

Oh, I'm observing red in the cafe and I prefer red.

So by having the preferences over outcomes and then separating the observed outcome from the inferred hidden state, you're gonna be like, you like spicy food.

That's why you say you like this kind of food.

So pull it back to these matrices.

Let's just say that they knew all the options.

Maybe people are not aware of all the affordances that they can even take, or maybe they have some to add themselves.

So this is like saying, this is like, these are all your chess moves.

We're playing chess, so we're not even going to worry about knocking the pieces off the table.

We're playing a well-mannered chess game.

But we can modify the rules, but we're playing with the affordances.

So somebody might have their mind expanded by just considering all the affordances that are available.

Like, well, I guess I could go to the art museum in the city.

but I'm not that kind of person.

It just hadn't even seemed to me.

So by bringing their regime of attention to affordances, we're seeing the whole space.

Then people can separate out the outcomes that they have preferences over for the hidden states.

And then remember affordances are the actions that modify the transition probability of the hidden states.

actions that's like where the pi plugs into the b which is intermediate between the s through time the pi policy doesn't plug into changing the state you don't have an affordance for red light you have an affordance to move to a location that you've inferred has higher red light so

There's probably many other approaches, but this sort of like gets the whole map out there in terms of the space of the possible, which is, again, we're saying that is the space of the possible.

It's not like there's some other secret affordance.

And then you can have a conversation about how people map things.

their perceptions which can include internal perceptions like being bored or being sad or happy that's the whole mental action they can map their preferences over observations to inference on states and the affordances that get them there Dean


SPEAKER_01:
OK, I'm sorry, you froze for a minute there, partway through your explanation.

So if I'm saying something back that you already answered, I apologize.

So this kind of, to me now, so now that we're talking about regime of attention, because I still heard that part, that kind of goes back to one of those live streams before where we were, I think I mentioned, is it about time on task?

because we can now measure that because that's now something that we easy to measure, or is it still about what have we made available to ourselves?

And so what we get a sense of in terms of what we might be missing in terms of change blindness as one example, versus what we now,

Again, how we've expanded our awarenesses as opposed to what we've given more attention over to.

Because, again, my sense is it's easy to measure what I'm paying attention to.

It's more difficult but probably more valuable to know what –

what the possibilities are in terms of that 80-20 that I may not have been conscious of before.

Does that make sense to you?

Because that's how I see this eventually moving on a gradient descent.


SPEAKER_03:
Yes.

So these are a single level agents right now.

Like they don't have metacognition.

So they're not like, I'm unsure about something or I'm sad about something.

But I'm seeing two cases where regime of attention applies.

It doesn't apply in this current model.

Two regimes of attention.

One would be like an intra model regime of attention.

Like we could have in this agent, a metacognitive attentional layer that is either paying attention or not to sensory outcomes.

And if they're not paying attention to it, it's going to slip by and it's like the gradient is flat.

And then the more attention they pay, the sharper they're going to realize their preferences.

It's like, wow, it is really sunny out here and I prefer red light.

So I'm going to go because I was...

brought my attention to it.

Then there's sort of this like XO model where you're talking about bringing people's attention to different parts of the model.

Now that itself could be an active recursive model, but that's like,

using this model to drop to both expand people's to the space of the possible and then direct their regime of attention to certain phenomena or attributes of this model.

So there's, I think there's like two little bit separate uses, but they both apply.


SPEAKER_01:
Do you think, do you think the second one,

Because if I go or I don't go, both of them give me a feedback loop that I learn from, right?

So do you think the second one is nuanced different than the first or quite radically different from the first?

Because I know if I don't go, that's quite different.

That's the zero.

And if I do go, that's the one.

They're quite separable and quite discreet.

Is what you're describing more of that blur?

I wasn't in on the 31.

I think it was where there was no line drawn in the sand.

And so I'm wondering...

Now I'm wondering about that because, again, ultimately if we can take this off the page and use it and actually use it in ways that give us more prediction matter expertise, boom.

So what do you think?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, let me type something.

Stephen, anything to add there?


SPEAKER_04:
Do what you're doing and I'll say what I was going to say.

It's sort of

It adds, but it's a slightly different point.

So I don't want to just let you finish this point.


SPEAKER_03:
Okay.

So the first case of the regime of attention is going to be, we do a recursive layer in this agent so that they can be paying attention to something or not.

Okay?


SPEAKER_01:
Yep.

Time and energy apply.

Done.


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

So the second, the sort of application or communication of the model would be deploying this

I don't even know.

It's like a meta slash XO model.


SPEAKER_01:
Are you coming up with new ways of describing things?


SPEAKER_03:
Not during a live stream.

We don't do that.

We do that before.

And then we rehearse, remember?

So you could use this model to bring the policy planner's attention to something.

So again, you distinguished there was first just stating the space of the possible.

So that's not an active secret.

Like the policy planner might go, oh, I guess I never really thought people would move from the park to the cafe.

Oh, I was thinking how people would get to the park and then how they'd get to the cafe, but I didn't realize that they would move between them.

Maybe that literally happens.

So that's just like a movement matrix.

Any kind of systems thinking or...

design thinking or agent-based model would converge on that, any kind of iterated modeling.

Okay.

But we're talking about what Act-Inf could direct their regime of attention towards.

So let's just say that we had a nice polished dashboard for this cafe movement simulation.

And then we had two kinds of

people, somebody with visual scenario A and visual scenario B. So maybe it could be anything.

It could be their preferences over ramps.

Children love ramps.

Some people cannot move up them.

Some people love bright.

Some people love dark.

Okay, so you can say there are, we're going to just say there's two kinds of agents in this simulation.

And we'd like to bring your attention, policy planner,

Your preference over observations, which is like local businesses being intact, people hanging out in the park during these times of day.

You have these preferences over observations.

We're kind of meeting you and we're seeing those, your observations are our outputs.

Our model is outputting the things that you are observing and caring and preferring over.

We've done a suite of model explorations and it seems a little counterintuitive, but adding a red streetlight in the park changes how people use it.

Nobody would have suggested the red streetlight, but we know that there's people who love red light.

And it turns out that just having one red streetlight, it makes it great for them.

That has totally changed the flow steady state, non-equilibrium steady state, reflecting in a tractor in our model.

That has changed.

And we can see these suite of simulations that

and we're just gonna call your attention to this graph and call your attention to how the points go higher on the y-axis as the x-axis dial changes.

But it turns out we don't want only red light in the park.

So we ran a simulation from zero to one, red and sun, half and half and every combination.

And so there's some curve and we'll draw your attention to the point where that curve is.

That's a great first step and we'll iterate.

because it's an open source model and we're in conversation with you and then we'll be able to test.

So the map and then the allocation of numbers on the map is kind of like the regime of attention.

That's our affordances as modelers.

And then there's that layer of communicating it clearly with strings of natural and computer language and visuals

so that the regime of attention of something not in your model at the core level, like the policy planner, they're like, oh yeah, I guess I do expect and prefer this.

And here's somebody who's giving me that expectation and preference and a toolkit for counterfactuals and elaboration and their outcomes are my incomes.


SPEAKER_01:
Okay, thank you.

No, but I think that's helpful because at the end of the day, there's somebody who's actually observing this and putting it into each one of these cells.

But I'm not sure that the people that are actually doing it are necessarily aware of it.

And so my question is, once they become aware of it, what can they do with it?

What's the value to them?


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah, so it's like the first ring of the model, you know, the person's moving.

We could do mean field approximation, really simple.

We could do the trajectory-based particle simulation.

Okay, then what's outside of our model and the sort of boutique step is communicating to the policy planner.

But now let's just say that I, the modeler, include the policy planner in this model or they have a different model.

Now the outcome of that model is being passed to me.

So you never get around the notion that there's like a boutique level of communication of the model.

But the idea is that like critical infrastructure could be inside the model and the boutique communication could be to the public.

And then we would have functional infrastructure and good communications.

instead of little sub ad hoc modules for critical infrastructure with boutique communication amongst them, so that any tenuous wrapper drawn around all the critical infrastructure is gonna be incoherent.

Then that incoherent blanket cannot be communicated out another level.


SPEAKER_01:
I think you're reinforcing the idea of the difference between instructionalism and interaction.

And what you're describing there is kind of the way finder rule

sort of coinciding with the person who's wayfinding.

So... Cool.


SPEAKER_03:
Maybe we'll have templates, guidebooks, playbooks, workshop, all those things.

Like, what is the right order?

There's probably not only one order.

But again, if we don't have a model to discuss...

it's going to be like getting to 0.1 and then to zero.

And then there's the grass and the grass is alive.

And then the grass has viruses and our virus is alive.

And what is green?

It's like kind of these like false starts.

But I think once it connects, even conceptually, we didn't write this in code.

It's not even pseudo code.

But once it conceptually connects, and then we can say, okay, let's make affordance matrix E1, and then let's make E2.

So just like it's an alternate hypothesis on the affordance matrix.

Then we have, you know, A1 and A2, just two hypotheses on the mapping between hidden states and observations.

And then we're going to run a two by two model simulation.

E1, A1, E1, A2, E2, A1, E2, A2.

Now we're doing decision support

And it's up to us, because that's the unmodeled, is our decisions, our preferences over the outcomes that we're seeing.

Oh, I like the E2A1 because I prefer people to be in the park.

And then it's the cafe owner says, I looked at that one and I liked that one.

Oh, we're modeling ourselves making this decision and you like people to be in the park and I like people to be in the cafe.

we have a different preference.

So we're not going to eliminate tension, but that's actually a conversation to have versus I consulted this group and they made this PDF and you did this and they did a word file.

It's a different file type.

They wrote in a different language.

They're not informationally integrated.

What is the comparison?

Cool, you know a consultant, but then this is a way where

People may call it transparent.

I'm not sure how transparent massive statistical models will ever truly be, but maybe it's kind of like a transparent engine.

It doesn't mean it's made of glass.

It means like there's a window into it.

So here we can see the pieces going in.

There's no side door.

There's no other matrix.

If we specify the partially observable Markov decision process, the POMDP,

those are the pieces that went in and the connectors are also established then we used a message passing algorithm or some other approach to find parameters so which part of that would you like us to interact on i mean that's an actual conversation and then even if somebody doesn't know about one part they could still be included in the dialogue perhaps dean


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and again, you touched on it, you kind of circled back to it a couple times, and you actually used the word support, whether it's support or serve or contribute, that's kind of the one constant regardless of how it sketches out.

That's the one thing that seems to run through this as a constant, how Active Inference actually supports


SPEAKER_03:
what what inevitably gets kicked out or what we observe at the end of the day right like we're doing this we're using limited high energy electrons and our attention and our finite life and everything like that all these resources so that we can have decision support in this example and then we undertake a policy that modifies the niche modifies the generative process and

but that's unmodeled.

Again, we are at the first level where we don't even have the construction site.

So then we have the model where I can choose to change a light bulb from the, you know, maybe we can add a natural light into the cafe.

That would be the next, that would be like an Act-Inf model of agents using an Act-Inf model.

And then that model would still have this boutique layer that has to be communicated

informally and that's like kind of the connective tissue where you have something that's like a pomdp interfacing with the world it has to have some sort of an interface like that stephen then dean yeah i think this is really helpful the the affordance thinking of affordances as effectively the setting up for the action policy and the generatives


SPEAKER_04:
generative model.

So it's saying, okay, in this case, it's the affordances to be able to stay or move.

And what I think is really helpful or I'm excited about is, and this sort of comes down to what I was talking about, like sort of the dynamic availability or the, this could be happening at different

rates you can have the same model that's here nested at different speeds let's not use it with temporal rates of recursion i.e there's the general idea that someone come in they go to the cafe they chose to go to a part of the cafe these might be happening over 10 20 seconds

they make a choice of where they are there may be something about people leaving the cafe from certain areas over the period of 10 minutes but there's also like i'm walking towards a cafe and i can be making choices i can be making a an intuition about what affordances to stay or move do i go in the cafes or go to the park and i i can be

thinking about it, I can turn, I can change my position, I could be flipping and flopping, actually, maybe once every half a second over a period of maybe 10 seconds.

And then once I walk through the door and I'm in the queue, I'm pretty much like in, I'm going to be staying for a while, right?

So now I'm in the rate, so the rate at which the same idea of the affordance is being used could be now happening at a slightly different nested

speed right because okay if i'll maybe choose i'm in here now am i going to stay for a minute or not i'll sit down and then it's like i'm getting into a good conversation am i going to stay for 10 minutes and they're different but they're the same in some ways so they're different chronos


SPEAKER_03:
But there's a kairos that links the timeliness together.

And that's why categorical cybernetics and event-oriented cognition like Martin Booth's recent guest stream, the event is I'm ordering.

There's a beginning and an end to that.

Now within that matrix or within that event context, it could be playing out at a second by second.

but then in a different event context, it can be a different model.

And the higher level is which context am I in?

What is the event?

So that I think will go a very long way towards going from like that kind of autoethnographic narrative

of like, I was jangling and I was moving my elbows.

So maybe in that event context, you do have the model.

Like I was getting a taxi.

Maybe that has a different spatial temporal scale, different set of affordances.

And then for our model, not for the real world, which isn't changing, but then in our model, we say, okay, once you're in the taxi, the event is in taxi.

And we're only going to look at block by block.

Or then we slow the model down in the simulation or something like that when the event context changes.

And then we're doing inference at the higher level on which event context we're in.

So we would have a way to talk about that and iterate and include all the richness in the sub matrices and pull back to the coarse grain when we have to do that.

Dean?


SPEAKER_01:
This is fantastic because it's really helping me.

I hope it's helping everybody else that's watching and participating.

So again, what I'm hearing is a very clear line being drawn between something what we might describe as goal-directed behavior and the relationship that we're trying to proscribe in three tables.

And it's the relationship between those three tables as opposed to a specific outcome which we, in our minds, say we want to achieve or realize or recapitulate versus building out a relationship through support, through serving,

through contribution.

But that is not a goal.

That stays on the relational level, never to collapse underneath that.

Out of that pops out these goals that can be directed behaviorally.

But if I'm

If I'm misinterpreting this or am I laying something over this that reconfirms my biases, push back on this.

But I think what we continue to do is reinforce the difference between what we're doing here in terms of a model and what effects that can potentiate versus a model that has a specific and idealized and a particular outcome.

Am I overstepping or overreaching?


SPEAKER_03:
No, thanks for sharing how you see it.

I think the only piece I caught on is goal isn't an act in fontology.

We have preferences and expectations and then we adjust, we trim tab so that we realize those observations.

And so it's like, I want to be under the finish line at the four minute and 52nd mile.

That's the observation I want.

Not my goal is to run a 450 mile.

So then there's actually policy selection, how you get there.

And this is from a paper that I'll release very, very soon.

Here's just a re-visualization of the POMDP that we've seen many times.

It's a little bit adapted from the mental action Sanford Smith paper and a few other sources.

But basically we have this discrete time POMDP.

And then we have C, the preferences.

E, the affordances, the possible policies that can be taken, and G, which is the expected free energy calculation.

That's the minimization component.

Those play into pi.

Pi influences B, which is the state transition mapping of underlying hidden states.

In our model, that was where one is inferred to be, but not what they're observing.

B is only changing how states transfer to each other.

A, which we had as the sense mapping matrix, is mapping from the observations, which were photons, emitted by the generative process, the niche.

A is intermediating between the photon and the inference on where you are.

Sometimes it's really obvious.

If it's dark, you're not in the cafe or the park.

If it's red, you're more likely to be in the cafe.

You used to be totally likely, but now you're pretty sure because we added that red light to the park.

And then there's uncertainty estimates, which can be fixed or learnt on all of those.

And this is not the only model architecture.

This is a model architecture that we're using to integrate perception, cognition, and action and impact service contribution.

Steven?


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, thanks, Daniel.

This is really helpful.

Talking about these three, the relating, so as the model is at the moment, the top affordance matrix, which gives the policy options, it's giving us sort of the states, the possible choices, so it's fairly set.

But those, the sense mapping and the preference matrix,

you could put temperature into that, or you could put variation of how much.

So for instance, at certain scales, generally speaking, the room was red when I went to the cafe.

When you're in the cafe and the lights, maybe the sun goes behind the cloud, comes out again, maybe...

in difference, there's different rates at which that can be fluctuating a little bit, maybe my preferences, as I'm starting to think about what I like in cafes in general, and then I'm saying, Well, you know what, I actually quite like it in the sun, right?

So but what this does, but even within this model, is you know, you could start to

not only change the values, but you could change how much the values either just by temperature or noise fluctuate, or maybe there's a temporal oscillation.

Maybe you say, okay, this one has the ability to change within its parameters over

five second period or over a five minute period or it's happening below perception you know there's a because we're circadian so you could say okay maybe someone doesn't notice there's a dark part of the room because it's just one table in the corner right so there's something nice about even within this model you've got the ability to to start to get this nested hierarchy


SPEAKER_03:
Yeah.

Like if you have uncertainty and you allow the parameters to be learnable in your model, not debating whether people actually are learning, just we're going to test two models, one where they cannot learn the mapping, one where they can learn the mapping, or we're going to test one where it's just visual versus a scent.

It might smell like coffee more outside in the park than in the cafe because that's where they vent.

Right.

So that could be learnt and understood and somebody at the first pass, oh, of course it's going to smell more like coffee in the cafe.

It might not.

So it doesn't have to be the direction people expect.

It can be included in the prior D. That was the only letter that didn't mention was that's how you get to the first state in the Markov chain.

is with the prior.

And so you could have high uncertainty over a prior.

Just say like, I don't know where I am and I'm very uncertain.

Or I'm certain I don't know where I am.

Or any other number of combinations.

And then,

The Bayesian information criterion, just to add like one more little technical note.

So the BIC, it's related to the AIC, but the BIC, it's basically, it's a value, BIC, is going to be something related to the number of parameters.

That's the K term.

That's the number of parameters times the natural log of the number of data points.

So that's like, are you fitting 50 parameters on one data point?

I mean, you can imagine that those are gonna be very poor estimates versus like one parameter on 50.

So then someone said, well, that one parameter, that's not the world.

Right, it's a model.

We're talking about statistical modeling minus two times the natural log of the likelihood function.

So this is like model complexity minus model accuracy.

So then we can say, okay, I'm testing three different affordance matrices.

one is the three by three one is a nine by nine because i've split each of the zones into three parts and there's like the window where it's very sunny and then a 50 50 and then a very red part and then i have another one where it's 500 by 500 and like the first 10 columns are the same because like they're all sunny and then the second one are all the same and they're very similar to the first 10. one can imagine that depending on what kind of data they have and how much data they have

they might find that the BIC for the 3x3, 9x9, or 9000x9000 model is supported.

And so that wouldn't be saying the territory is three by three, nine or 900.

It wouldn't even be saying that the map is three by three, nine by nine, 9,000.

It'd be like saying, this is a Pareto optimal, Bayes optimal statistical model that's on a frontier manifold between explaining variance while reducing model complexity.

So it's like,

That's the level above the map.

And that's where the BIC and model selection comes into play.

You don't just do the bottom up and then finish your model at the zero to one.

That's the iterating.

We could have a whole network or matrix of models and then have principled ways of selecting amongst them and adding a new data, designing counterfactuals.

What would be the most informative

data point to obtain?

Or what would be a perturbation that would distinguish these two different hypotheses?

Those are the kind of maximum information foraging questions because they amount to which policy as a modeler will reduce my uncertainty about dot, dot, dot.

That might be formalized in this meta XO model or it might not be.

but we can use like act-inf-quant as our kernel and then act-inf-qual as our wrapper, hashtag.coms.

Dave and then Steven.


SPEAKER_00:
Have activities of navigating among models at various scales and topologies as you've been describing, have those been observed adequately to tell


SPEAKER_03:
to what degree free energy is being minimized during that evolution that's a great question potentially for martin boots or for someone else um which is kind of the first principles unifying theory angle which we didn't even mention today in act inf would be like dis

could we have a common currency or could we understand actions selected in different contexts as being in the same game of reducing expected free energy?

So then could we look at, like we have the sub matrices within CAFE, PARC and neither.

And then like, we're looking at the fine scale transitions as a free energy minimizing process and the macro transition, and then looking at how like small and large changes in expected free energy are related to sort of micro and macro transitions in a hierarchical model.

Is that what you're asking?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, whether using this modeling framework

exhibits the kind of behavior that allows you to evaluate the free energy principle and its friends in play, in the real world.

And for one thing, are people just plain turning on data collection adequately?

Donald Knuth did that way decades ago when he was developing latex.

He turned on this massive data collection.

Everybody in his organization was feeding in...

Every key press was being captured, and then he ran metrics on that, and he says, well, this is where we're putting our attention.

I'm trying to make things easier, and I'm making them harder.

Well, that's wrong.

Let's start working.

And if he hadn't collected the data, he wouldn't have been able to give all those speeches about how it worked and how you study data.

the ecology of software development.

And this stuff is a lot cooler than anything that he ever did.


SPEAKER_03:
I think that we're moving from a zero to one to a continuous deployment of models landscape, which puts us squarely within the scope of Act-Inf.

Because we're no longer doing descriptive analysis, like how was this car made?

We're doing like continuous deployment on the ship of Theseus and that is gonna give a lot more information.

And then whatever information is collected, we'll respect that as being,

observations so whether we have every key press and every mouse movement and the pupil diameter and the eye gaze and the natural language processing on the live stream and and and all of those things it still would just be observations and let them debate whether it's all them ones that we need but then we'll specify our matrices we'll use bic we'll iterate with the real world

And yeah, I think that between the Git commits and the language use and the absolute accuracy or validity of the model, there would be quite some interesting patterns to see.

Like does, as the accuracy versus Git commits, do you like go really fast up and then dip and then recover accuracy?

Do you have a prolonged period of low accuracy followed by like a phase transition was like, oh, once we added in the sense of smell, it just was like, whoa, then it fit.

Or is it like some other dynamic or how does that relate to the language use?

How does it relate to the saliva, cortisol, metabolite?

Like there's no end to what you could bring into the model because they're just observations.

and then the relationships amongst different kinds of observations is something that's learnt and we'll use the BIC and related techniques like Bayesian model reduction and structure learning, which Friston pointed to as the key open problem in the dot tools section of our June 21 symposium.

Structure learning is how you go from just proposing variance on matrices and exploding your model space

to actually finding models that are on that frontier of being useful.

So very interesting question, Dave.

Thank you, Stephen.

And then closing round of thoughts.

Brilliant.


SPEAKER_04:
So I was just seeing that that was really helpful to have this diagram here.

So you've got preferences and affordances for action straddling, you can see my hands, straddling the free energy, which is coming from all the sensory kind of

interpretation so to speak and one question i've got is you know you've got uncertainties there and i know this is just purely more from an instrumental kind of

practical point is as it importance is at the moment there that's kind of like i suppose you could have a big matrix and the uncertainties could be flipped they flip on and off what's available you know it's like you can move you can't move you have to stay right maybe at some point you've got no choice you've got to stay right um whereas in the other ones they're numbers so it could be you could vary them so you you would try and change you would you would treat those matrices slightly differently right because the other one you're either switching on and off

options for what you could do and down lower down you could do something to change that number between either zero and one or whatever so yeah just wondering what your thoughts are on that yes so this is just one architecture and one representation so i'll be totally open to being wrong on these points but i'll just bring up what i think is interesting about that


SPEAKER_03:
Notice that the uncertainty is on A, not O. So you could say, my thermometer says 22.2, but I don't know how that maps to the real temperature because it's a noisy thermometer.

That's zero ambiguity about the thermometer.

But if you say, I'm not even sure what the thermometer says, it's 20 something,

Then you need another model with what is the visual observation mapping to the thermometer reading, mapping to the temperature.

So uncertainty, that's just one interesting point is it's not connected to O. But of course we have uncertainty about what we're seeing as a blur, right?

But if you don't even know if you saw it or not,

you're even another level removed.

So you could be uncertain about the mapping from whatever the thermometer says to temperature.

The extreme case being you're so uncertain about the mapping of A that even when you visually see it says 22, you're just like, I literally got no information on the real temp.

Or it could be a tight mapping.

But that's one thing that doesn't have an uncertainty associated with it.

And again, not that it couldn't, it's just that maybe it doesn't need to.

And then the other one is,

As you pointed out, there's no uncertainty over pi.

That I find quite interesting.

And I think the reason why is we're not doing inference on pi.

We're conditioning all of our analysis, conditioning our free energy calculation horizontal line on pi.

So we're saying there's three options and I'm conditioning the expected free energy of one, two, or three conditioned on selecting one, two, or three.

So it is a little bit of a different variable and also action is not in this.

It's implicitly in there because the B matrix, which we can have uncertainty on in how the B matrix, how policies map to B and how B maps to states.

So a technical phrasing would have to clarify, like, you know what, I drew the red line here to the middle of the edge.

Is that an uncertainty on the mapping of pi to b, or is that a mapping on... So it's not a technical claim, it's a visual artifact, but I think it might be possible to have no uncertainty on observation and no uncertainty on policy.

And that could just compress the computational complexity

by a huge amount and all the other ambiguity could actually be like very nicely dealt with elsewhere.

But if it's like, I'm just thinking of other examples.

People can probably imagine.

If there's uncertainty on what policy you're conditioning on, I think the analysis starts to lose sense.

Like conditioned on left or right, am I going to get the food?

That makes sense.

Conditioned on, I'm not sure if I'm going left or right, I don't see how there could be anything other than you don't know.

It's not a conditional, so you can't get a marginal likelihood from a Bayesian perspective.

So yeah, Stephen, yeah, last.


SPEAKER_04:
Yeah, the last point, I suppose it's one of those, it's that question saying, just do it type of thing, isn't it?

With the policy, it's like, you've got the option of just doing it, right?

So you say like, okay, I'm just going to do it and run with it.

So I don't, the benefit of actually then going and starting to tweak it all the time and put, like, you've got that all around it.

The point is, let's put it all around it and the conditionality, I think you just said, and then run it.

And then I suppose it is what it is.

And ultimately it's the best you've got.

So, you know, like if you're an organism, basically the policy you've got is the policy you've got

So you can go back and change your preferences because of what it did, but ultimately that's all you got.

So maybe you just have to sort of run with it.


SPEAKER_03:
And you'll either resist dissipation or not.

Dean, and then Dave, if you'd like a closing thought.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, so here's my closing thought.

So today we basically pulled out a material relationship on that slide.

We built it in real time.

and we were making a comparison to the materiality of a city state, I think.


SPEAKER_03:
To bring it back to the paper.


SPEAKER_01:
To bring it back to the paper.

No, I think this is really important because I actually support a lot of what Serval wrote.

And I also believe that what we were talking about was material generative models.

Out of that, there's a kind of a parallel to an iterative process.

All right, so even in the diagram that you have up here, this is confirming iteration.

So whether that iteration is in iterating, filling in a table versus it being blank, right?

There's an iteration process or the city grew from 12 buildings to 1200.

That's an iterative process or whatever.

We've got multiple confirmations of the fact that at scale, iteration is a thing.

It's a material thing.

What I'm going to go away from today's conversation, because I don't have the answer to this, but now I've got to think about this, is so when we move away from those things that fall out, those capitulations that fall out in terms of skyscrapers and

Nine by nines from three by threes.

Do we trust the map or the blueprint?

Or do we trust the process, meaning critical path, in the same material way?

Because I think in the point one, as you said, Daniel, we're just talking about zero to one right now.

But at some point we're gonna have to get past one and to get the real bootstrapping going.

And then the question is, do we have to now incorporate something to get outside of scale-free for that to make sense?

And that's gonna be my question to myself is, do we materialize the trust

in these models the same way as we materialize the model themselves.

That's going to be my, I'm going to go think about that for a few hours because that'll burn a few neurons for sure.

It'll go up in smoke.

But thank you for this because this was really helpful to me, like incredibly helpful.


SPEAKER_03:
Thanks.

You know, when I was in model stream one with Ryan and Christopher and they were going through it and so,

there are better people and will be better people to teach it and walk through it.

And there'll be a million ways to do it.

So it's a funny thing that it happened in 33.2, a funny thing happened on the way to 33.3, but yeah.

Dave, any last comments?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.

The question of uncertainty over policy is,

require needs a lot of reflection and study and i would suggest one thing to look at is what exactly is repression that's all i have to say for now yeah okay fellows thank you very much


SPEAKER_03:
Congrats to those who have listened to the end and you're always welcome to participate in Active Lab.

So thanks again and peace out.


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks, Daniel.


SPEAKER_03:
Bye.