## rF3zyjv2Drw

Hello and welcome everyone. This is Active Inference Guest Stream number 66.1 on December
6th, 2023. Today we are very excited and honored to have a presentation and discussion with Adrian
Bajon. First in this session, Susan Hastie is going to provide some slides and context.
Adrian will provide a talk and we'll have a discussion on through the hour and then Susan
and I will stay on the live stream. So if you have any comments or questions, please feel
free to write them. So thank you both for joining and Susan to you.
Thank you, Daniel. And I'm so excited and thank you so much for affording this opportunity,
Dr. Bajon. I thought that we would actually begin. I wanted to introduce you and as I was
thinking about it, I could spend probably the entire time just going over all the citations
and awards that you've received. So I thought though that what I really wanted to share was,
something that is not necessarily in the public domain. I wanted to really dig into the significance
of the ConstructoLaw and the difference it's made not only for, I think the world, which most people
don't appreciate, I think, and also the significance it's made for me.
It's definitely changing paradigms across the globe. This, of course, is Adrian's many publications
and his many citations. I think there's 90,000 citations of his work alone to date.
But what I'd like for the audience to really take away is really thinking about life in a new paradigm
and how the ConstructoLaw can inform us of how I think about a difference in not only just what is life,
but also what is power and what is evolution and change. And I'll give you a good example of
where we will talk about a flow paradigm or flow architecture. And in thinking about architecture,
one idea that still permeates society and I think holds back progress is how we think about
hierarchy. And Adrian's books has definitely informed me to think very differently. You know, we still
think about hierarchy like we built them in pyramids 4,500 years ago, you know, where we housed dead people.
And so this actually has the potential to change that and to really think differently.
And one thing that a lot of people don't realize is, is that scientists from around the globe have been
coming together for over 14 years annually and presenting their findings and how they've taken this
and spread it into every domain imaginable. This was actually a doctor, Dr. Lucia, who's I believe he's in Italy.
He shared with me just last night in talking about it and how he's actually taken the ConstructoLaw and
made innovations in research in cancer. And I thought his quote was just so powerful in terms of how we think
differently about reality by really understanding and going very deep and contemplating how the ConstructoLaw
is, is so significant. This actually, what I think is, is what is, what I've discovered and uncovered
is, is that it's actually spread far beyond the halls of academia. And I'm going to make a bold prediction
because we're going to be talking about predictions. And I'm going to predict that Dr. Bajan
Bajan will be awarded the Nobel Prize because, because it's not just the citations that of his work, but when we look at
and you go deep, you're going to find that this, the people are using the ConstructoLaw. For example,
yeah, this, this one academic paper has already had
many, many citations in and of itself. You know, it's being talked about in terms of religion and in terms of
indigenous societies. It's impacted architectures in how airports and how structures are being made.
And for me personally, I'm not coming out of academia, but, but reading it and understanding the ConstructoLaw
really has given me an incredible awe and appreciation for science. It's actually given me a new appreciation
for life. And, and so here's just a few of the ways that, that ChatGTP just put together. Here is how it's
already spawned new ways of thinking about every area of, of, of application and innovation. And, and so
what we're going to be talking about today is really focused on Adrian's books that are accessible to
people like me. I mean, I would not have been able to dig into the, the many, many publications
and receive the, the, the depth of understanding of it without reading these books. And I actually call them
the, the essence of strategic thinking because when we think about prediction, we are thinking about how
we're strategically going to move forward. So today we're going to focus on the physics of life. And Adrian has
agreed to, to give us another chance. So we may not be able to cover all the many questions that have
come through our forum, but we will be digging into them after, after he, after we'll dig into some of them
that come in on the chat today. And, and then we will also be exploring them in a future, in future sessions.
So, so with that, I'll turn it over to you, Adrian. And, and I look forward to this and I hope the
audience really enjoys this and, and is inspired as I've been.
See.
Okay.
Yeah. Thank you, Susan and Daniel for the invitation to, to speak to your audience.
Thank you,
of course, I'm very grateful and humbled by the introduction. The, I saw that in order to, to get
the discussion going, it would help if I show you a few concepts of black on white. And the slides I,
I happen to have at my disposal are from a very brief lecture I gave at the 13th Constructors Law
conference in Turin, Italy, just two months ago. It was a lecture about vascular flow structures. But the, the,
the meat of the presentation is about how to predict the design evolution.
And vascular is in fact, a good title for the subject that interests your audience, namely how the, the brain works.
The brain is eminently a vascular architecture. It is the predictable from the Constructors Law
in, in many ways, in many respects. So, okay. And so I, I start my presentation, first of all, with the definition
of the meaning, the meaning of the words. I am, I'm a professor, meaning I teach students to,
how to think and how to question themselves and how to display humility, humility when hearing ideas.
And so the meaning of the word vascular from Latin is something that looks like
vessels conveying blood or lymph. This is a design, an architecture that's, that speaks of flow,
flow, flow, which means movement, and hierarchy, which as you'll see very soon, is one kind of drawing.
And now, the word design should not scare anybody in, who's in love with science. Design is
poo-pooed in physics. It shouldn't be because it really means the drawing, drawing. It came into English
from French, from French, the French, from the Italian, the design. It really means a sign, an image that conveys a message.
And here I have, I just juxtaposed the
two versions of the same drawing, a river delta and the human lung, to drive the point that
the drawing unites the animate with the inanimate. And when the drawing does that, it means that
the phenomenon that the drawing represents belongs to nature, not to a particular compartment in science
or a particular department on the university campus. The drawing unites. And that is,
the drawing unites. And that is, if there is one single message from my introduction here, it is that.
Another thing about what I'm showing you is that natural things are physical.
Physical. They're observable, visible, palpable, measurable, and movable. They are common sense.
They are not jargon. I speak of drawings, of architecture, of images. Natural things have
configuration, shape, structure, rhythm. They have flow. And their mother is the fact that they have freedom
to change. That means they have freedom to evolve. And about the, let's call it, the freedom to evolve
comes from the fact that these things are moving. They are moving because they are set in motion by
flow architectures that function as engines. Most of these engines are natural. Only a few of them are
human-made. In any case, every single such engine is driven by one kind of energy source. You can think
about the sun driving the movement of the atmosphere. The atmosphere is a globe-sized engine. The engine
produces power and the power drives movement. And while the movement is the source of another phenomenon,
which is called dissipation or friction, because the mover has to get the environment out of the way.
The environment, the niche does not get out of the way unless it is pushed. And in the rectangular box,
I show the engine driven by an energy source, the work or power produced by the engine, and then the fact
that in the green brakes or interfaces between mover and environment are dissipating the power.
So if you sum up these white, fat arrows, the energy input from the energy source is dumped 100% into the environment.
But in the meantime, inside the box, because of flow architecture, something was moved from one spot,
one place to another. That phenomenon is called locomotion. It could be animal, it could be vehicular,
it could be, well, oceanic current, and all the other things we know about. So the bottom line is that
nature is movement with flow architecture that unites, really unites the geophysical with the biological,
with the social organization, which is emotion. These are images that change over time. They are not
still art. You can think of them as movies, many, many movies running at the same time, at the same time,
but every single one having the same plot. The plot is that the movie has direction, meaning the changes
have a directionality to them. And I recognize this published at first in 1996 several times,
then. It's called the Construct the Law of Evolution in Nature, or meaning the announcement that, hey, listen,
it's the design in nature, stupid, has been overlooked everywhere, physics, thermodynamics,
but not in engineering, which is my background. So I wrote that for a flow system to persist in time,
and that's the definition of the life state. It must evolve with freedom such that it provides greater access.
I illustrate that with three drawings from the evolution of a river basin on the floor of a laboratory.
From time to time, the architecture flows more and more easily because of erosion.
The construction of a river basin is a tree. The Construct the Law announces, probably screaming from the rooftops,
that there is a direction of nature that points toward the future. And that if you know this statement,
the future is a way to go. And if you run it through the wheels of your mind, you have the ability to anticipate the so-called future.
To continue, again, because I teach the importance of knowing the meaning of the words and the importance of using common sense terminology,
here is what we mean by evolution. It is a sequence of changes in flow configuration in time.
Freedom. Freedom is not some intangible. It is actual physical features that allow a system to change.
And freedom can be measured. In design, freedom is measured in terms of the number of degrees of freedom,
the number of ways in which you can change something. Freedom can also be measured in terms of the
effect of increasing the number of degrees of freedom, the effect of increasing this number of degrees of freedom has on the performance,
on the ability of the mover to move more easily. You can think of it as, okay,
straightjacketing the flow of a river. Well, that river will flow
less fast, meaning slower, and not as far as a river that's not straightjacketed. In fact, the river that's straightjacketed
has a personality of its own to revolt and remove the obstacles out of the way. The fallen tree log,
the levees at New Orleans, the history of earth is that. It is about removing obstacles in order to secure greater freedom for what moves.
And this evolutionary design, as I just illustrated, facilitates access. Access to flow in areas, volume, volumes, and that, of course, includes society.
Access, I checked the dictionary, although I shouldn't have to because I come from a Latin-based language. It means the action of coming toward or near something. It comes from accessus
accedere in Latin. It is a word available in English. This movement naturally, by itself, untouched, tends toward an architecture that's multi-scale.
It's called hierarchy or arborescent, if you will. It is a drawing that distinguishes itself through a few large channels,
cohabitating with many small channels. In fact, they're moving the same stuff and they're moving it in harmony.
The few are not exploiting the many. The many are not revolting against the few. They're all flowing together in order to facilitate flow over the entire available space.
And this configuration springs out of nowhere. It is nature itself. My beginning in this line of thinking was in, actually, it was before 1996.
The problem that got my publishing going is here in the left-hand corner. It was the question of how to shape a rectangular space that generates heat,
how to shape it so that the generated heat current exits with the greatest ease. That means it is rejected by a rectangle that is the least hot, meaning with the smallest
temperature difference between itself and the ambient. In other words, I gave myself one degree of freedom, which is the shape of the rectangle,
a shape that varied from square to shallow rectangle. The answer to my question was the rectangle in the middle, which is not too shallow, not too square.
But that was the click, because from freedom to change something, I discovered one drawing. Before this exercise, when I posed the problem of how to shape it,
I was not knowing the answer, I did not have a drawing. And you see, in predicting evolution, the thinking begins with a blank page. It is the most honest kind of beginning,
meaning the least biased way in which to start posing questions. That beginning has a chapter with a blank page called, the chapter is called,
I don't know, I don't know. But I discovered this, and the rest is history. And in the year 2000, I wrote the first full length book about the multitude of examples of this type,
is this is the ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail ail
In science, quite often, the first question is overlooked.
The first question should be, what is the phenomenon?
Meaning, what are we talking about?
In the case of design in nature, the phenomenon is,
meaning the elephant in the room, is the evolution of flow configuration.
It could be the room, it could be the field, or the ocean.
In other words, ocean. In other words, nature itself.
So, that phenomenon is a change with direction, also known as the passing of time.
Now, getting closer to the subject of interest, these hierarchical architectures
are, can be simple or complex. Here, I have two drawings of the same kind of flow.
It is a flow that connects one point with many, many points on a circle.
If I, in the first disk design on the left, the maker of the design had a very large number of
degrees of freedom. They are called L and Phi and Gamma and Beta and X.
Look, and that took three years to do in the course of a doctoral thesis.
It's called the perfect design.
And then, on the right, one example that was done a lot faster by recognizing very few
degrees of freedom called capital L. And on the next slide, the performance of these two designs,
the perfect, shown as black dot and the cheaper one with white squares,
that performance plotted with this lower case f, which is a number proportional to the flow resistance
between the center and the perimeter. And on the abscissa, the capital N is the number of points on the
perimeter, which means that migrating to the right, the design is more complex.
You see here that the two drawings are, in fact, they may look different,
different, even though they are both point to circle trees, but their performance is quite similar.
In other words, a simpler and cheaper design will do, you see. In other words, the maker of the design
does not waste time. The maker of the design is wiser than the one that polishes a,
what was this, sorry, that gilds the lily, you see. And that leads to another way to organize the
presentation, which is that if you polish something ad infinitum, you are not creating nothing.
So perfection is the enemy of evolution. This is a dictum from Voltaire originally. It happens to be true
true from the point of view of the construct the law. In fact, I discovered it, but I also discovered
the first discoverer, in this case Voltaire, because I'm a fan of the history of good ideas. And here's how
the enemy of evolution, if you know it, benefits us. The movement of people on the surface of the earth is
hierarchical. We don't move around tracing the grid on the surface of the city. We congregate, we gather,
and we gather together, we collect ourselves to one point of attraction. Use your imagination, you know, public square.
And then at the end of the event, we migrate outward to the area as a circular river delta.
And in so doing, we organize our society hierarchically. Here's an even better example of how it is going,
because you see in the previous drawing, which is as simple as possible, this city block does not show
the smallest alleys and the cul-de-sacs and the lawns across which people walk. But here, in the drawing of
the Atlanta airport, we see the walking, this is on the left side, vertically along the concourses.
The vehicle, there's only one train shown as a black line. By the way, once again, the slow and the fast
are carrying the same flow, meaning the same crowd of people. Access is provided from any gate to any
other gate. And the figure of merit, or the performance of the whole, I'm talking about the whole flow system,
which is rectangular, can be measured in several ways. One of them is the average travel time between
one gate and all the other gates. So keep that in mind, travel time averaged over the area, that's the
measure of performance. The movement is with two speeds, fast along the train, slower, perpendicular to the train.
Any one of us is this capital letter Q. And the territory has a fixed size because area costs money,
of the way, but a variable shape, a variable ratio of h divided by l. It is possible to show
almost on the back of an envelope, how the average travel time depends on the shape. Time is on the
ordinate, the shape is on the abscissa. And you see here a bucket-shaped curve, which is a minimum,
shown as an empty circle. The shape at that location is called h divided by l optimum. And the time is
minimum in that particular design. The discovery, meaning to put physics at the disposal of Voltaire,
is that a little bit of imperfection, meaning travel time that's just slightly longer than the
smallest imaginable, gives the designer a significant bandwidth of freedom, freedom to choose
a shape that's comparable with the mathematically best shape, but not exactly the same. In fact, the
person who is empowered, sorry, endowed with this kind of secret, will not spend time on finessing
this particular sculpture to the point of identifying the absolute best. So imperfection, imperfection,
where the freedom, the freedom of choosing and then moving on is the mother of diversity in nature.
Diversity happens from this freedom, freedom not to fall in love with the absolute best.
And there are people in several domains, including biology, who would talk about nature makes mistakes. No,
nature doesn't make mistakes. Nature simply doesn't have time to focus on finessing itself. What works is kept.
That is the slogan that I think comes closer to how nature works. One aspect of movement, geophysical, biological, and also
human is the so-called logistics S-curve. Anything that spreads freely on an area or in a volume,
it spreads not only in space. You can imagine the milk spilled on the kitchen floor. It spreads in time.
And the invaded territory, which in these rising curves is indicated in the vertical direction,
the invaded territory grows in S-curve fashion. It grows slow, fast, slow. And the reason for that, by the way,
here are a few more examples that are relevant to what I'm going to show you next. These are actual measurements.
Every single curve is the S-curve. On the left is the power production in the United States as an S-curve.
That is up to 10 years ago. On the right are the total miles driven in the US per year. And at the very bottom are the movers themselves,
meaning the world population. That is also an S-curve, which is already hitting the ceiling.
The ceiling. I remember when I was an undergraduate in 1970, the rage was about the fact that there's a population explosion
and the end of oil and lots of other things of this kind.
And, well, as I said at the beginning, humility plays a role in science. It's much, much more useful for the thinker to start with.
I'm not so sure. I'm not so sure. Let me look into it. Even if I believed these things, it's very important that I am the first to question them.
And the reason why the S-curve should be an S and it is predictable is this. Anything that spreads, again, the milk on the kitchen floor,
initially it invades the territory as something that moves fast and far and narrow, like a finger.
And once the finger hits the wall, in this case, the milk spreads laterally. I call these two phases of the occupation by using words from the military,
invasion and then consolidation. It's always this way.
And, well, but as you can see in the lower right hand corner, invasion invades the area at an accelerate, accelerating rate.
And consolidation continues at a decelerating rate.
And so these two arcs are spliced together, obviously, naturally, and together they make up the S-curve.
So this is the prediction. Where does the hierarchy come in? The hierarchy is an add-on, meaning the next slide, which I don't have,
which is that things that spread on a surface spread in arborescent fashion, not as a single needle as in this particular example.
And the tree spreads the stuff even faster than what I illustrated here. In other words, something that spreads as a tree
will have an S-curve will have an S that is taller during its viral intervezzo, you see.
And so let's see, that's basically the, let's call it the preparatory material for showing us who we are.
The movement, this is an image of human movement today. It is primarily, primarily due to aviation.
Aviation, we all move on the globe from any point to any other point imaginable.
Those who originate from, let's say, diametrically opposed points,
necessarily will have to flow through the heart of this vascular architecture. The heart is where this
architecture was born, which was Europe and North America. And that is where the architecture
has grown the most, which is why it is in deep red right now. And so the movement is hierarchical.
The physics of movement is that to move more, you must burn more fuel. So the burning of fuel on the globe
must be hierarchical. Meaning I'm looking at this image and I read the movement. Another Adrian reads the
burning of fuel. And as you'll see next, the burning of fuel is in fact proportional to the
wealth available on the globe, as in have money will travel. And also on the next slide, I'll show you that
increasing hand in hand with the wealth and fuel use and movement is freedom.
And that's, this is the final slide. On the left hand side, these are the facts, these are data. People today like to pray
to, in the church of data and data, well, here's data. These are the facts. Those dots show that every group on the
energy on the globe falls on the diagonal between energy use and annual wealth, which means that what is
annual use of energy in physics and engineering is just another language in which to tell the story of
the hierarchical distribution of wealth on the globe. Meaning that economics and physics are two sides of the same
coin. Meaning two ways in which to describe the same drawing. And the drawing is hierarchical.
All these dots are racing upward along the diagonal. Because as everybody knows, every government reports annually
its increase in GDP, in wealth. Well, the government doesn't brag about the increase in the burning of fuel,
energy use of fuel. Which of course means that no country is going to cut down its consumption of fuel.
And on the right hand side, in other words, the red arrow, the direction of the bicyclists and the peloton
and to the fronts, is the future. On the right hand side, the same data with the annual energy use,
on this time on the ordinate, and on the abscissa, the competitiveness with regard to economic freedom.
The arrow that points toward the future is the same as on the left hand side. The dots are the same as on
the left hand side. And they tell the story of a world that another peloton of bicyclists that are racing
upward, even though most governments don't know it, that the evolution of the society of the globe is toward
not only greater movement, easier movement, but also greater freedom. And that takes me to the slide that
the moment that Susan showed you. The mother, if I were to say the mother of nature, is in this direction from
freedom of change is possible, from change evolution is possible. And from evolution, the nature that we are
and which surrounds us has become possible as well. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Susan, would you like to provide a first reflection or direction here?
Susan, would you like to provide a second reflection of the world?
Um, well, before it evaporates, you were shaking your head so much,
Janet, I want to see what's allowed for you.
I wrote down many things. I have many questions to ask. So, but please feel free to ask one first,
and I'll prepare one. Okay. Okay. Um, what, what really stood out for me, um, and I'm, I'm slightly
prejudiced because I've been going through the, the physics of life. So, you know, that's, uh, the,
so many, so many, um, ideas were captured in that. But what really stands out for me, um, Adrian, is, um,
is I'm seeing the system as object and structure as a verb.
No, structure, structure is a noun. Um, structure is a, um, um, it comes from the same, uh, word as, uh,
uh, uh, well, has the same origin as the word strewn, strewn meaning, uh, spread, spread,
though in this case on a, on a page or on a canvas. Uh, uh, it's a drawing, it's a drawing with, uh,
with a message streaming out of it. So structure is, um, is, uh, to structure is a verb, uh, clearly most,
most of, uh, uh, this is now in the, um, uh, in the languages of, uh, the Indo-Europeans, uh, tend to have
both, uh, they could be both noun and verb, uh, that, um, is, uh, is a feature of, uh, this group of languages.
But I don't think it's, uh, limited to the Indo-European. The point is that, uh, um, yes, I, uh, applaud, uh, uh,
everybody's interest in the meaning of the words because quite frankly, um, we are surrounded,
we're actually drowning in jargon. Uh, jargon is a good term. It applies for, uh, it applies to, uh,
locker room discussion, a language that's understood only by 20 people, all of them men, you see. Um,
yes, it's just like, uh, like any, uh, uh, uh, department of physics. Oops, sorry. I didn't mean
to put it that way, but, uh, you get the idea. Uh, the, uh, the object here, which is why I continue
to praise, uh, Galileo Galilei and Da Vinci and these people, the object is to, to make these, uh,
uh, these ideas or ahas are accessible to, uh, to everybody, to everybody. It doesn't mean to, uh, dilute
them or to dumb them. Not at all. It means, it means, it means to display humility and to speak in a way,
uh, not only to speak, but to make drawings that, uh, that open, um, the eyes of people. And I'm, uh,
fortunate because as a professor, I have this, uh, uh, freedom to, in fact, I just, uh, lectured today,
the freedom to make drawings, the freedom to, uh, to, uh, we asked to tell a joke, uh, every once in a
while, um, uh, maybe a self-deprecating joke. The point is that the, uh, uh, the, the flow of science,
the flow of science, uh, benefits from, um, from, um, first of all, modesty, but also
the ability to, uh, ask questions and, uh, to question the idea, but to question the, the speaker,
including yourself. So, so let me, let me do that now. Um, um, and, and help me understand where I'm
confused because I guess I'm, when I say the structure is verb, I'm thinking about how we're
talking about, um, configuration and reconfiguration and, um, and how the drawing actually turns into a movie
that, uh, that, you know, that I can get, uh, you know, my head around, um, and, um, and specifically,
you know, what, when I'm, where I'm grappling with this and it's opening doors is how to think about,
you know, using the Constructor Law, the difference specifically between the tree structure,
which to me is shape and, and the S-curve and that is time. So, when I'm thinking about reconfiguration,
help me understand, you know, where, you know, when I'm thinking about movement and flow and the
configuration of architecture, um, how, you know, how is that informing me? Well, where am I?
Well, okay. A, um, a hierarchical drawing like the, uh, the river basin, uh, has, uh, uh, many, many shapes.
The biggest is the shape of the page. Inside of it, there is the shape of, uh, the angle between two
tributaries. Uh, the drawing is full of such angles. Those angles are all different. Well, by the, at the
same time, they're all similar because they're all kind of close to 75 degrees or 50 degrees. Um, so you
have shapes galore if you, if you, uh, if you, uh, if that is what interests you. Others, others are
interested in lengths. Uh, well, there are many channels and the, the lengths are themselves hierarchical.
Some are, uh, you know, uh, longer. Others are shorter. Um, the, um, the more of these, uh, let's call
them, uh, shapes and lengths, uh, the more complex the drawing is. And complex, you have to be very careful
with this word is one that, uh, uh, that, uh, uh, that, uh, uh, places the discussion closer to the locker
room, meaning the, the jargon, because it hides, hides these, uh, elements that I was, uh, uh, um, enumerating.
Uh, complex, the word itself means, uh, means twisted together. And, um, well, that's, if I use that word,
I, I declare defeat, not victory, you see, if it's twisted together, uh, I don't even,
I cannot even wish myself good luck because there is no luck. Um, in any case, I know what it means.
And to me, a word like that, uh, uh, is an invitation to, to question, to question the word,
to question the speaker, to ask myself, what is the drawing that's complex? If you ask,
if you ask this question, you discover that the drawing is not that complex, because if, if you can,
if you can make it, it, it is not, not twisted together. You see, it is twisted together, uh, meaning,
uh, like one of these, uh, uh, uh, truly factual, uh, drawings when you cannot draw it, you see. Uh,
so on and on, look, we can, uh, we can, uh, uh, uh, uh, slice the, uh, orange here in small slices,
but we're wasting our time if we do that. The point is that, um, uh, to answer you, uh, the words that, uh,
we use, uh, are very useful, but, uh, they also tend to, to, um, to, to separate us, to keep us apart,
if we do not agree on their meaning. And that's why I interjected, then I added some, uh, imagery to
the words that you're speaking. Okay. And, uh, by the way, uh, structure, uh, same origin as strewn.
Well, that's where the S-curve, uh, phenomenon is, you know, the, the spreading is S-curve, uh,
it's growth, also known as growth. Um, the collecting is, uh, also S-curve, uh, which is also growth,
you know, during the, the, the reaping of a harvest, the, uh, the flow of the grain from the area to the
silo, uh, is a stream that grows slow, fast, slow. Um, the direction of the flow is not the phenomenon.
The history of the flow is the phenomenon, and it is called the S-curve, um, also known as the logistics,
uh, S-curve, or the logistics curve. And, um, I can tell you the history of that if you're interested.
The point is that, uh, logistics are from a military, military, um, um, what is the word?
Um, yeah, they call it logistics. The, the flow of material, uh, food, uh, not just ammunition, but, uh,
mobile hospitals and the infirmaries and, uh, all these things that are flowing and moving, uh, behind,
behind the troops. Um, and, uh, there's a great quote from, uh, Napoleon, Napoleon Bonaparte. Uh, he said, uh,
um, amateur, he was talking about generals. Amateurs talk, talk strategy. Professionals talk logistics,
uh, logistics. And, uh, that was Napoleon. Uh, the quote is, uh, uh, even better known because of the
English language as, uh, belonging to a general Omar Bradley, uh, who used it without crediting Napoleon.
So, so, so, but in any case, these are two very important figures who knew, uh, which end is up.
Think about it, uh, highly successful, uh, because you see it today in, uh, in the conflicts that are raging,
it's not about what goes on, uh, meaning not only what goes on, on the, uh, on the front. It is about, uh, the, um,
logistics where the, uh, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the power of the society behind, behind the, uh, the, uh, the military activity.
This is extremely important to, uh, to, to, to learn from every, uh, news item today.
Well, thank you. I'll, I'll give a reflection and connect just a few areas of flow that I think really speak to some of the points.
So the key reflection is nature is not broken by department. It's not broken or mistaken in any way.
And that is radically different than many organizational structures, including in learning and education.
And so that's a big question mark and a big open space. And then there was some pictures and some words and some symbols,
but that's a starting place. That's perennial. Um, I thought of two kind of flows evoked in your description.
The first was drawing with a ballpoint pen on the page and the ink as it diffuses through the paper and about how there's a trace.
And then there's, you could imagine filling the channels of the paper and different properties of the paper.
And just about how the act of drawing is and why the line fixes at a certain point.
That's the S curve has flowed to its flow. It dries, solvent is gone. So,
and so you can go into more detail, but just in that act. And then another one, perhaps more in a informational space is the jargon.
And the jargon can be piercing, but it can be a grappling hook to go a hundred miles out and get really specific.
I'm talking about theta sub delta of figure four of your 2012 paper, and that can go all the way down.
And then there's that second phase of expansion. It's not just about throwing needles.
It's about throwing the needle to the wall. That was your engineered setting. And then if it makes contact,
then there's this secondary phase. That's the actual overture and the initial precision technical detail
is a first contact, if even that. And again, that gives science education and praxis, I think, a real
challenge and opportunity.
I think you hit the nail on the head three times real hard. And it's the same nail, even though every
time it issued a different screen. But that is in fact very accurate, very accurate. And it happens. Just a second.
And it does happen the way that you professed. It does happen even after it hits the wall,
in all your examples. Because happening is nature itself. Let's say the campus divided into departments that
don't talk to each other is unnatural. It's unnatural.
And so, you know, these barriers have been disregarded by clear thinkers.
All the time, the ones who have made progress or contributions are the professors or researchers
that had this innate ability to scale fences and jump over them or to get drunk and step off the curb
and fall on the street. These are the people who made the history of science. They're called polymaths.
Okay. And we have them. I know even here at Duke, I know the few who are this way. They are my friends.
And we're too busy to start a revolution. But the future is the way you sketched it. It will be,
it will continue to be one of the filling in the spaces or rediscovering or repeating what others have
done in a sketchy fashion or maybe throwing a jargon word out there or perhaps as a joke,
or even more effective as a non-PC joke. And then the people say, aha, aha. And then,
and in the beginning, this act, this spark you described, makes roots and fills the space because
because a good idea is like food for the hungry. It attracts, it attracts participants. It attracts
students. It attracts disciples, followers, second generation teachers or artists. And I'll come back
to your first example. When you, when you started speaking, I saw immediately the history of painting.
The first thing that the Da Vinci and these people, Michelangelo did was to make a very fast pencil sketch.
Something that only they recognize because it was already in their minds. And today with all this
instrumentation, people are discovering as traces of graffiti on the canvas that had been covered much
later with the various colors over and over again. Yes, that's the way, that's the way nature really works.
And nature is also the brain itself. Let's face it. There's no other, there's no other architecture
that works except the one that I've sketched crudely in my, in my exposition here.
Yeah. Susan, do you want to give a kind of closing question or comment while we have Adrian?
I'm going to begin with a blank slate.
All right. I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm available a little longer if you, if you have a food for the hungry here.
I'll ask a question from the live chat if, if, all right. Yeah. Upcycle club writes a question to
Professor Bijan. What are the biggest unanswered questions or areas of exploration within
constructal theory that you hope future researchers will investigate?
Good question.
Well, the, I've been kicking this ball for what, almost 40 years. Not, not in the direction of
discovering the biggest that need to be discovered or to be explored, but out of curiosity. Today,
as you saw in Susan's presentation, there's a world movement. It's populated primarily by,
by, by younger people who are in fact, uh, competing with me. Uh, clearly, I'm, uh, I'm not at the start of my career,
but they are beginning, uh, and in fact, they're quite, uh, uh, creative and, uh, productive. Um, the, um,
um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um
to say, listen, let me, what was that word?
Let me prove it wrong, but there's this word from Karl Popper.
Falsification.
Yeah, let me falsify it.
Okay.
And so I'm looking for phenomena that first viewing seemed to contradict the Constructor Law.
Yes, and because I have the talent of looking around and, yeah, I keep my eyes open.
Yes, when there is a heavy downpour and the rain falls on dirt, obviously the river basin
is born, but the river channels flow with cataracts.
They develop a periodic sequence of little pools interspaced with mini waterfalls.
Cataracts.
Yes, the river is putting the brakes on itself.
Yes, it's a contradiction of the Constructor Law.
Right?
So I questioned it and I published it.
And I discovered in the course of proving the Constructor Law wrong, that the Constructor Law
is right.
So the water that flows in a periodic fashion flows faster than in the textbook of water flowing
uniformly and steadily down an incline, along an inclined plane.
And the reason why the interrupted flow is faster is there is nothing, nothing more perfect for the flow of water
than to fall without friction, to fall over a dam.
So the water and the erodible soil have in themselves this tendency called freedom, freedom to facilitate access.
And I was, yes, I was excited to not to prove myself right.
I was actually trying to find the limited applicability of this concept.
And in this case, I did not find it.
And I am continuing this sort of, I am the, okay, in the same room, I'm both, you know, prophet and a gadfly.
I'm trying to prove, prove Adrian wrong.
Okay.
And it's exciting.
But I'm an audience of one.
I talked to my wife, and she knows where I'm coming from.
And all of it is worth laughing, in fact.
But if we don't laugh, we have no future, frankly.
So, just to kind of wrap up, the, I think I read the paper you're talking about, but I remember something about the eddies.
Oh, correct.
And, you know, and that kind of brought me back to what, you know, what Daniel's question was about, as far as, you know, how we break free these silos.
And, you know, how does, how does that, how does that form?
And also, I think that also speaks to maybe the second session that we can hold, which is about the freedom.
Because, you know, we really, that in and of itself, that's a topic that is just so rich.
I'm happy to mention the eddies, because that was an earlier example of my questioning this principle.
People all over, people all over, view turbulence, especially in the applied world.
Turbulence is something bad, something that increases friction.
Yes, yes, something that's not as good as the smooth flow called laminar flow.
The one with the smooth streamlines.
And this is what you see in the textbook.
Yeah, turbulence, this complicated thing, you know, eddies, rubbing, and meh.
Well, you know what, turbulent flow is constructed as well, because, because compared with the laminar, turbulent flow answers the question of what really flows.
What flows is not the fluid, what flows is the movement across the fluid, meaning the movement from the fast to the slow.
In other words, the mixing, the mixing is, you know, the mixing is known in physics as the transfer of momentum.
That is what's facilitated by this sudden change in the drawing from smooth layers to things that appear to be complicated.
By the way, they're not complicated.
When I did predict the sizes of these eddies and their speeds and their hierarchy, they are hierarchical, the eddies.
The eddies are basically these trees, the trees that I drew, like the trees of a river basin.
But the river basin that becomes this turbulent pool is a tree, the channels of which are embedded in the same fluid, which is the pool.
And every channel is unstable and becomes curved, becomes an eddy, and it rolls over.
And the tree that I just sketched becomes a bouquet of broken branches that continue to roll, that continue to roll, filling the space.
But you can see their birth in the little species that I gave.
And in any case, there's a hierarchy of eddies in every so-called turbulent flow field.
Now, the doctrine of turbulence research is not like what I just spoke.
It is about a uniform distribution over the field, over the pool, of eddies of various sizes, as if there are these fruits of various sizes all thrown into a pot and mixed around with chocolate sauce.
That's not what turbulence is. Turbulence is a broken tree structure, the branches of which keep rolling, embedded in each other.
And that so-called mixture is the one that vehicles the movement of movement across the volume.
Without it, there would be no, frankly, without turbulence, there would be no life on Earth.
Everything would be stagnant, cool of, I don't know what, a layer of no life, and then another layer of no life, and a lot, you know, in other words, no mixing.
By the way, so mixing, we know this from other stories of science and history. Mixing is in fact, the mother of not only life, you get species from events of encounter, you know, encounter or meeting.
And new species from, for example, from interbreeding, and so on.
And so without mixing, there is nothing on Earth. Nothing.
So one final question, that speaks back to your slide on nothing moves unless it's pushed.
Yeah.
That's right.
And so that's...
It's a fun thing to explain that.
Yeah.
A peasant knows that the horse is needed.
You don't need only a cart.
And I come back to the news of the day.
The logistics, the ability to move things, the ability to power things.
This is, this is extreme, I would say is the most important because society itself is alive because of the power that it, the society produces.
And that the power, by the way, something else that people don't realize, is spent as soon as it is produced.
It is spent and destroyed, dissipated as soon as it is made.
And that is called movement or life.
Life means to destroy the power that is available to you.
You don't have to look at today's advanced society.
Look at any animal.
Any animal, the movement of the animal is the physical movie of how the useful energy embodied in the food is being destroyed.
No food, no animal movement.
Simple as that.
No food and no engine, which is the animal itself.
That means death, not life.
Death.
And these are basic facts of physics.
You don't need an education in whatever, anthropology or…
Yeah, you could use an education in a veterinarian medicine.
And that's where you get this much broader picture of who we are.
Thank you, Adrian.
We really appreciated it.
Hope to talk to you another time.
All right.
Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to get to know each other.
Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you so much.
Very insightful.
Thank you.
Well, Susan.
I have many random remarks to share.
Would you like to share anything?
Yeah, go ahead.
Go ahead.
And then, of course, what's going on in the chat?
Yeah.
All right.
I'll read a few.
Traveling fast and slow.
That reminded me of thinking fast and slow.
And then in the airport, there was the fast backbone and the slow walking on the edges.
But in terms of thinking fast and slow, actually, the fast part is on the edges of the biological organism with the reflexes and the reactivity.
And the slower part is the backbone.
So it's like kind of the same, but different.
Another piece was he said that the first question is often overlooked.
Like, what phenomena are we looking at?
What's the system of interest?
And then that made me think about like biomechanics, like an elbow moving.
And so in the physics textbook or in an example, it's like, well, there's a weight on the end of a stiff rod and it's set up.
But that's kind of the last mile question.
The phenomena of the arm is a broader phenomena.
And so you still may want to have that very reduced disciplinary model.
It's small.
It's useful.
It can give insight and so on.
It's just part of a bigger tapestry about that phenomena.
And that's a different starting point for the conversation and the collaboration on that topic that's not disciplinary.
So the entry point of the real system and the entry and returning point is by definition, the broader conversation than the kind of terminal scientific artifact, which, as we discussed, that's kind of the broader conversation.
And so the broader and kind of softer, but more space enclosing.




Yeah.
But far as opposed to the broader and kind of softer, but more space enclosing.


Yeah.
When you think about phenomenon.
Yeah.
And actually, you know, that brings up.






You know, when you think about phenomenon.

I almost want to go to, you know, what is the context.
But phenomenon is actually, you know, what is flowing?


What, you know, what, you know, what.

So when we kind of pull that in as far as the fast and the slow.

And, you know, a lot of times.
By.
By.

putting turbulence into a conversation, which if somebody is associating turbulence with conflict,
then they might be actually distorting it, distorting the freedom of what can emerge.
And so this comes back to the invasion acceleration that you spoke about, and then the consolidation is the deceleration.
Yeah, a few points on that.
First, I think a question I'd love to learn more about is trends are not monotonic.
So just because things have been a certain way for the last 50 or 100 years,
doesn't even mean the sign is going to be the same.
So I'd be interested to see how that kind of change comes into play.
But I'm thinking about a car's engine.
There's parts where the laminar flow is the desirable trait for transfer.
And then there's parts where mixing, like liquid and gas and thermal mixing, is more important.
And they simply are not the functional, they play complementary functional roles.
It's literally like fast and slow.
And there's never a reason why, especially considered apart from a specific system,
it basically can't be said which of those tendencies are, you know, even, you know, how to compare them,
which is why even though we were looking at a two-dimensional shape with a rectangle,
there was only one degree of freedom, which was the ratio.
So that reflects, I think, having a simpler...
We need to capture that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Capture that.
Yeah.
This actually...
So if we were to translate this and bring in some active inference,
what's kind of coming alive for me in this is the difference between exploration and exploitation.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like, he showed a parabola with a ball rolling to the bottom of the hill,
and then there was kind of a zone of tolerance, like within 10% of the Y-axis.
And so it was a pretty shallow bowl, wide bowl.
So there was a lot of play that would keep it within a 10% tolerance on the Y.
Now, to persistently optimize that, all the ball needs to know is the slope of which direction it should head it.
Given that it's already knowing that it's within this zone of controllability, which is how all bodies are.
Everyone has, you know, been part of an unbroken chain of blood sugar regulation.
So the evolutionary and the developmental prior is that the physiological state is already in the zone of control.
And then it's just a directional issue to head towards the bottom of the bowl.
But you can't stop X change.
You can't stop climate from changing.
You can't stop physiology from changing.
That's not to say you can't de-risk and think about real consequences of action.
But just taking it at the most narrow technical sense of change through time and evolution, all things are changing.
There's no point in trying to halt change.
And it's a simpler actionable heuristic for the ball on the bottom of the bowl.
Which way is the free energy flowing?
Yeah.
Path of least resistance.
And, you know, this kind of comes back to the phenomenon of how do we predict.
And, in fact, I would suggest, let me share my screen.
Because for those people listening, I just...
Go for it.
Yeah.
Do you see it?
Mm-hmm.
So, yeah.
I mean, just putting that...
You know, being able...
I constantly go back to and reread this law.
In fact, the reason I said earlier that I'm going back to a clean slate.
Because it was like, you know, whenever I have the opportunity to speak with Adrian, he puts something out there.
And I'm like, what I thought, you know, I was reading into it.
It was kind of...
Yeah, that's kind of going to that...
The phenomenon of exploration.
And, you know, seeing what's out there.
You know, how are we perceiving the world, right?
And then how do we switch to exploitation?
And when I'm saying exploitation, I'm talking about how do we move from being in the world to how do we move to remaking the world or changing...
You know, doing what he talked about originally is, is how do we construct the world around us for our niche construction?
Actually, he does reference niche construction in the book.
And so how do we do that so that we're using the least amount of necessary energy?
Because I think that one question that I had, which I think would be a topic for a future conversation, is how do we know when we are violating the constructal law?
Yeah.
And this ties back to the belief updating.
If I could, I'd like to connect a few of the words you have on this slide, the act-inf ontology.
And that's kind of like, as we explore all the time, that's how we kind of begin that bidirectional conversation.
So like, for a finite size system, that is a thing.
System of interest, it's a thing.
It's the blanket and the internal states of the particular partition, the particle, the thing itself.
To persist in time, non-equilibrium, steady state, or a similar phrasing, talking about the path of least action, of the stationary state, or the attractor, or the trajectory, or the path of that thing.
So we're talking about the same kind of system of interest.
And then evolve with freedom.
As we heard, these terms are plain.
And so evolve being changed through time.
Notably not taking on the kind of intergenerational connotation of evolution.
Some people, like in biology, would say something like, well, evolution happens between generations and development, and ecology happens within a generation.
But here, time evolution is being used more generally.
Freedom was described in terms of degrees of freedom, statistics.
Degrees of freedom.
And we could also think about rule-based degrees of freedom as affordances, as the knobs that can be changed.
Those are the degrees of freedom on that interface.
And then to the last piece, the providing easier and greater access to what flows.
Here, I think to the recent guest stream, 63.1, that discussed the philosophical status of material and information flows.
And more than...
The logistics.
Yes.
And then, of course, the joke, I guess, was like the logistic curve.
But it's like logistic and logistics.
And then, what status to accord to material flows and informational flows in integrated autopoetic mortal computational systems, where there's a weaving of like the blood flow of the brain and the ion flow and the nutrients.
And there's an informational flow, semantic flow, that is not strictly described by the material architecture.
Hmm.
Now, to pull back...
Okay, so put that in the frame of reference in terms of...
One thing he said that was like blew my mind was...
It's not the...
What is flowing?
When he was referencing what is flowing?
And I'm...
You know...
And so, what you just said...
Where I'm going with this...
And, you know, if this...
If...
Tell me if...
If this is...
Where you're thinking is...
Epistemic and pragmatic value.
So, what is flowing?
I mean, once we...

We can calculate that...
And he also gave a calculation for degrees of freedom...
Nice.
These are great directions.
I'll just go to a different angle.
I thought it was...
I loved his recurrent connection with drawing and art.
Yeah.
And about the sketches that are being discovered behind paintings.
That's like deeper blankets of the painting.
Deeper levels of historical meaning.
And cross-referencing like...
Oh, this one is signed at an earlier date.
And we have this letter.
So, we know that they were speaking with this person.
So, it's like deeper in space and time and causality.
And then, even artists like Kandinsky would go through many iterations and many sketches on even non-representational or post-representational.
However you want to think about the kind of art that's not like a landscape.
But the painting was then synesthetic with the auditory.
And so, that kind of brings together...
Not to resolve, but for the beauty of the snapshot, the noun structure, and the dynamics to structure as a verb and as a process.
And like the fact that you can't disentangle or drop one or the other, prioritize one or the other.
They're literally snapshots of the movie.
Yes.
Yes.
And to kind of tie that back to the path of least action and...
And...
And...
But it reminds me of a saying...
And correct me if...
Correct me if...
Correct me if I'm not getting this correct.
But yeah, the difference between...
The saying goes is the difference between an average artist and a...
And a expert or a master artist is knowing when to paint the last paint stroke.
Okay.
That's cool.
It reminds me of...
I would have written a shorter letter if I had more time.
Like there's these kind of...
Are they intuitive or are they counterintuitive?
Because it's knowing what not to do and when to do it.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes.
And this...
Yeah, this...
Yes.
Yeah, that's...
That's a great...
Way to...
To wrap that up.
Yeah.
Because it comes back to...
You know, the...
The path of least resistance and...
You know, and the...
And the freedom.
And so oftentimes the affordances...
If people don't understand that...
You know, they're actually pushing too hard or over designing.
And...
Yeah.
How do we...
How do we use the Constructural Law...
And Active Inference...
To...
Yeah.
To...
To his point.
I mean, it's like...
Power is spent as soon as it's produced.
I'll make a few more contact points with Active Inference.
One question I have is like, where's the observer?
We've explored a lot this year with Chris Fields' course in the quantum information sciences and so on about the role of the observer.
So...
Should we think of these flow processes as only or actually occurring on the material substrate?
If so, where's the space for the observer or the polycomputing of Mike Levin?
So that's one open question.
And then I think another important touchpoint is like notions of hierarchy, which you return to.
And there was like a very unconventional hierarchy represented with people's diffusion from city blocks.
Like smaller and bigger parties getting...
Going to and leaving at different times.
And then the diffusion maps across the city.
And so it's like, that's one representation.
He kind of contrasted that flow hierarchy with like a pyramid type representation.
Maybe you mentioned this.
And then that made me think about two ways that we see the hierarchical models in Active Inference.
One of them...
That are different than both the pyramid and the city blocks.
One of them is the spatial enclosure.
Nested blankets.
Nested models that are enclosing each other.
Not just diffusing into the same city.
And then another is the metacognitive.
With the work of Sam Ed Smith et al.
In Livestream 28.
With the hierarchical model representing metacognitive layers.
So between the pyramid, the city streets, the enclosure, and the mines, that one symbol bridges us already such that it puts the brunt of the question on what to do and how to do it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
A lot of seminars to explore.
That's exciting.
So to wrap up and to capture, is there any other questions?
Not that we have to answer them now.
But if you can just kind of read off any other questions that might have shown up in the live chat.
I'll capture those.
And we can start kind of a repository of what showed up today.
And that way we can use it to explore further.
Yeah.
We will continue the kind of series and the curating of questions.
I'll just read one.
Mills 8102 wrote, what are the factors or conditions that afford the restructuring of a flow system?
Does it always require the imposition of sufficient demand on that system to change?
Does it take a crisis?
Great question.
One question I have is where are perception and action?
Do you have any last comments or thoughts?
Just my head spinning.
Wow.
Well.
Wow.
Great.
Thank you, Susan.
And thank you.
Thank you.
Farewell.
Yes.
Till next time.
Absolutely.
Okay.
Bye.
Bye.

## UAtfOc3Q4_0

Hello and welcome.
This is ActiveInference Guest Stream 66.2 on February 15th, 2024.
We're very much looking forward to this follow up on a very delightful 66.1.
So thank you, Susan Hastie for organizing and helping with this to you for the introduction.
Unmute and continue.
Thank you.
Okay, thank you, Daniel.
And thank you, Adrian, for coming back.
Our last session we covered Design and Nature, your book on Design and Nature.
And this is my favorite book of all, which is what we're going to cover today, which is Evolution and Freedom.
So I'm going to turn it over to you and I look forward to this presentation and our discussion afterwards.
Okay, thank you for the invitation, especially in view of the fact that this is my second appearance on your show.
The written version of our discussion is in this book, which is still relatively fresh.
And I prepared a few slides for the next 20 or 25 minutes.
The first slides are a brief review of my previous presentation, which is about the fact that the phenomenon that screams to be recognized in nature, or for that matter in physics, is the appearance and then the evolution of the flow configuration.
The flow configuration, as you can see here, unites the animate with the inanimate.
In other words, it does away with the dichotomy inherited from the church.
And without the idea going forward, everything that flows and moves on earth is driven by power, which comes from the consumption of fuel and food.
And the flow architectures, most of them natural, that function as engines, for example, the atmosphere, the hydrosphere, all these things that move are driven by power.
And as they move and as they morph, they dissipate the power and I call the dissipated features brakes.
And on the right hand side, you see a summary of everything, which means the geo, the bio and the socio are morphing, meaning evolving flow architectures.
The statement that emerges after all these observations, again, is based on observations.
In other words, this law of evolution in nature is of empirical origin, like all laws of physics.
And it says that it actually defines the live state, which is our subject today.
For a flow system to persist in time, it must evolve with freedom such that it provides greater access.
So the phenomenon is the evolution of flowing form, which is actually the time arrow or the definition of future as something different than the present and the past.
The keywords are only two, the ones that will give us support in the conversation.
So the definition of evolution from the dictionary is changes that occur in a discernible direction in time.
That direction is known by many names, objective, purpose, goal.
But there are many other such words that represent common sense.
Common sense, common sense. Freedom are physical features that allow an entity, we call that the system and thermodynamics, to exhibit changes.
Freedom can be measured in terms of the number of degrees of freedom.
For example, the piston moving in and out of the cylinder of the engine has one degree of freedom, which is the position of the piston.
Other configurations, the natural ones have innumerable degrees of freedom.
You can look at the direction in which your cat is moving.
And anyway, the freedom description is a very, very thick book of examples.
The punchline is that without this physical feature called freedom, there can be no evolution and no design.
And for that matter, no direction in time.
The book has 11 chapters. Time is short. So I will, if I'm lucky, I'll touch on the chapters highlighted in red.
And I'll take them one at a time. Economies of scale is an observation from economics.
Coming from design and nature, this observation is predictable.
In the upper left-hand corner, this is a classroom exercise.
You can show easily that if a stream, a stream of a particular flow rate flows through two parallel tubes, meaning one stream divided to flow in parallel through those two tubes.
That stream flows a lot easier through a single tube with a flow volume equal to the sum of the previous two.
In the second example, if the flow is external to the solid walls, that is, for example, in two barges that are pulled up the river by two tugboats.
Well, the load, the total load on those two barges is pulled a lot easier on a single barge that is bigger.
So in going from left to right, in both examples, from left to right, it is easier to go from two to one.
And that, according to the construct the law, direction of evolution from two to one suggests that these two examples, the phenomenon of accretion or confluence or association is part of nature.
If that is so, then why is it that flows everywhere around us are not of one big size?
And the reason is that the flows on areas and inside of volumes, such as the animal body, are flows between one point in an area and one point in a volume.
In other words, flows between one point in a very, very, very, very many points.
And this kind of, let's call it the design challenge, is satisfied or answered by a flow architecture called hierarchy.
And again, empirically, hierarchies are everywhere, but those who are curious can discover them one by one and report them in ways that are memorable.
And the easiest to memorize a punchline is to arrive at the same punchline many times in presumably disconnected domains.
So here in social organization, the hierarchy of cities in Europe plotted on the vertical versus the city rank.
Clearly, the big cities are very few. The biggest one is only one. And then these descending lines, best known empirically as Zipf distributions are proceeding the same way with a relatively fixed slope.
Over time, the lines move upward because population has been increasing, but the hierarchy remains the same.
The zigzag line at the very top is a prediction of this descending trend, one based on a very simple model that I used in my classroom.
From cities in Europe to trees in the forest. This is a, you see this, these two areas that occupy the descending diagonal.
They represent data based on assuming several patterns of distribution of tree canopies on the forest floor.
These are tree canopies seen from above. Regardless of what pattern of construction you choose, the hierarchy is relatively rigid.
And it looks just like the hierarchy of cities distributed over a continent.
Here is another example. This is in fact an icon of the distribution of animal populations on the globe.
Population size versus body size. It is a descending association, which if one gets really curious, could punctuate with actual data from the zoology literature.
Clearly, we're familiar with the aircraft. Airplanes are falling on the same line.
And the point line is that the hierarchy is natural and the one size is not. So that's a very important line to keep in mind.
As we, as we, as we, I don't know what I did that I lost my, oh my God. I can not change the slide though. All right. What am I doing?
So, here we go. So now I get to the next, next topic inequality.
Here's the movement, the actual movement on the area. Most familiar to us is the movement of freight. It is on an area. It has many participants, but the few, the few are large, big, they travel fast and they travel long.
The same freight is on the same freight. The same freight is carried by a multitude of smaller vehicles traveling slowly in short distances. The freight is one. The freight is the one that scans the area.
And this coexistence of the few with the many is stable. It is stable. It is stasis, stasis. It is harmonious. In the animal realm is the same story.
You see down the, down the slide, the coexistence of the few large and long and fast with the, with the prey that the move short, slow, and the prey is very numerous, which is a coexistence that does not change over time.
Now, in the human realm, we see also, let's say in our, in our lifetime, the hierarchy of movement on the globe. It is in this case, represented by aviation.
The color red is about high density movement of people, people who are flying carpets called airplanes. And the rest of the globe is all in motion. It is interconnected.
But sooner or later, individuals from the blue area have access to other points in the blue area by passing through the two chambers of the heart of world aviation.
So, incidentally, hierarchy movement is synonymous with hierarchy in the consumption of fuel. And what is seen in the image has emerged naturally.
It is not the result of a, say, the United Nations. Now, on the left side, we learned that the hierarchy and movement and fuel use is synonymous with the hierarchy in the distribution of freedom, not of wealth, not freedom, wealth.
On the left side, data from economics show the coincidence that if you plot the wealth on the vertical and the consumption of fuel on the horizontal, the populations of the world fall on the diagonal.
So, I regard this first graph on the left side as an entry in a dictionary, which explains that what is known as wealth distribution in economics is known as the consumption of fuel or for that matter, the distribution of human movement in engineering and in physics.
And in physics and social dynamics. On the right-hand side, the same data are plotted with fuel use on the vertical and economic freedom on the horizontal.
And the arrow pointing toward the future, because, by the way, all these dots are racing upward, meaning listen to governmental reports.
They all are about this year being better than last year. I mean, if the people get lucky.
Then, on the right-hand side, you see the dots are migrating toward greater freedom.
This is obvious graphically, but not known very well to the general public.
Now, looking more closely at what's going on in every such country, advanced or not so advanced, the population has unequal access to wealth.
And this is a common presentation of the distribution of wealth in society.
On the vertical direction is the accumulated share of income that is a share that belongs to a particular fraction of the population.
So, the income share is called epsilon. The fraction of the population is beta. We'll see this graph more than once after this.
And if the distribution of income were to be uniform over the population, then the curve should be the straight diagonal.
But none of the curves are straight. They are, in fact, convex with, say, France and Germany being relatively close to the diagonal.
The US and China, although similar to each other, they're more convex.
And Brazil and South Africa, arguably less developed than the previous four, have curves that are even more convex, meaning deviating from the diagonal.
We're going to see very soon why this convex curve is natural.
And I decided to illustrate or to present the answer by imagining a population, unlike in this graph about the four, six countries,
a population of things that do not represent human society.
And I have on the left side images of the so-called river basins, beginning with the actual river, river delta, then the river basin of air flow through the lungs, river basin of water being pumped upward by the tree in Africa.
And then in the bottom photograph are the river basin of space coming down the slope toward the Chalet are all hierarchical and convex curves are crowded in the lower left corner of the epsilon versus beta graph.
beta graph. In other words, by the way, the rest of the picture shows details of that crowdedness.
For the details, you have to flip through the book. The point is that in the absence of people
in the population on this flowing system, the inequality is much, much, much worse.
So, social existence, meaning living together, has brought these curves upward from the lower right corner
in the direction of the diagonal. This is, in my opinion, good news, but it is relatively unknown.
And the comparison between the living society and the, by the way, they're all life force systems,
but the comparison between the human society and a society of things that flow without people
connected to their neighbors is that difference is striking. This brings me to two examples of
social organization and how it benefits from innovation. The first example is a look at
prehistory beginning from left to right on the vertical direction that the Q represents in
the dimensionless terms represents the rate of loss of heating from a container with hot water
water, hot water being used by primitive population. On the abscissa, that's the horizontal direction,
is that M tilde is the dimensionless and is proportional to the rate of hot water consumption by
individual, by one individual. It means that on the abscissa, the direction of time from a prehistory to
modern times is from left to right. Now, if you look at the piecewise linear curve that emerges,
it starts on the left with the hunting and gathering individuals living in huts. One
pot of hot water, meaning on fire, for one particular hut and that pot leaks heat to the ambient
and that rate of heat leak is proportional to the Q on the ordinate. Now, the invention, the first one is
what was the idea of having a larger pot of hot water as shown in the example called N equals 3.
and then from that pot, the individuals are growing their own supply of hot water.
And then climbing up the curve, one invention after the next leads to a social organization,
what leads to association, more individuals or more neighbors coming together
and benefiting from one central source of hot water. And what's interesting here is that the
from one invention to the next, the slope of the curve decreases and that means that on a per individual basis
it becomes less costly or the loss diminishes and therefore everything about hot water becomes more economical.
The next graph is about another invention called dendritic design as opposed to radial design.
So the dendritic design. So the dendritic design is an invention that allows the user to
to get by by paying even less for heat loss to the ambient. In other words,
the making of hot water becomes more economical. The radial design's envelope is at the top and you see these
thin lines. They have to do with the invention.
The thin lines are descending. They're sliding downward as the size of the population called the capital N increases.
The second example of what an invention does for the benefit of the whole population is here.
I proposed this image of complete equality of a population. It's spelled out at the top. You have a square
domain populated with equal inhabitants, equal inputs of something, for example, water or hot water or whatever,
milk if you want, and equal channels. And equal channels are obeyed by equal flow rates. And this area is an area
that facilitates the flow of something from the area to the point. And the point called the source or the sink is in the lower right corner.
And going from the upper right to the lower left, the grid becomes finer, which means that the population increases on the square.
And in that direction, the convex curve of epsilon versus beta migrates toward the corner in the lower right. In other words, the distribution of this flow over the population becomes less and less equal.
In that direction is the direction of the size of the size of the population.
So this is the first conclusion. Next is what can be done about it.
And by the way, you may have thought of communism. If you look at the first paragraph,
the importance of this imposed equality on the population is easy to imagine, maybe kind of more difficult to implement, but that has been tried.
But when there is movement from the area to one point, source or sink, clearly, clearly the individual
in the vicinity of that very special point benefits from a bigger beta, a bigger beta corresponding to anyway, very few people like himself or herself.
Anyway, what can be done about it? So assume that the design has only two times two participants, as in the upper right,
the simplest square, the simplest square is investigated here. First, it is reproduced in the lower right corner and it's labeled a design without innovation.
To the left, there are two designs in which one innovation was implemented.
And that innovation is represented by the solid arrow. The solid arrow is the idea of somebody to reduce the flow resistance between two neighbors.
So in other words, the flow was liberated by one inventor with regard to his or her access to
an adjacent neighbor. And you see here that regardless of where this inventor was located on the square,
the effect of liberating the flow is to move the curve, that curve to move it closer to the diagonal.
So a single innovation is a local design change that benefits the entire population, not only the inventor.
Next, again, all these examples have to do with changes, changes that happen in the flow rates and the distribution of
flow rates called movement and wealth and all these other things, including freedom over the population.
Another way to characterize all these things, the hierarchy and the inequality and so on,
is the word diversity. And here I show several images of diversity in what concerns us the most,
which is the human society. This is my graphic way of putting in front of you where the Homo sapiens came from.
This is a picture of the past two or three millennia. It began with the Homo erectus and then
the spread. The first migration was two million years ago. The next, the 900,000 Denisovans was 500,000 years ago.
And then the rest, you can leave the labels on this fork-shaped flow architecture. What I think you should pay
attention to is the word artifact, which is in red at the very top. All this movement, movement toward the
diversification of the population of Homo sapiens had to do with change, which means, if you want the inventions,
the abscissa, the first migration of Africa became possible. Next came clothing. Clothing made the second
migration of the first migration of the first migration of the first migration of the first migration of the
North and Northeast Europe, and Eurasia, Siberia. Clothing, big deal. Fire and clothing both have to do with power,
power and heating for the retention of that heating. And then the third power-related change or artifact was
boating, boating, boating, which enabled these early humans and hominids to invade the world as we know it. The result,
as you see, the horizontal lines is the diverse population that characterizes
the globe today. And now all that means that the modern humans are the object of the history that is taught in schools.
That history is only the blink of one eye, 10,000 years, no more. And in this direction, more of the same took place.
You look at these artifacts on the timeline at the very bottom, agriculture, the wheel, domestic animals,
and then, of course, the mechanism, the machines, language, of course, and literature, printing press,
and all the way to today's advancements in human affluence, which are, in fact,
possible because of the industrial revolution. And now, coming even closer to who we are and closer to the
present, science itself is an evolutionary design that took place and continues to take place because of
freedom, freedom to innovate, freedom to communicate, and freedom to implement. My own specialty is thermodynamics.
This is relatively new science, 150 years since it started to spread seriously. Before thermodynamics, the science had very
strong legs, all of them successful. The heating part was called caloric theory. The rest of it without heating was called mechanics.
This is as old as even before the Greeks, the old Greeks. And of course, evolution, which really means design, is also even older than the previous two.
You see it in everything from cave paintings to the Renaissance and, of course, the kind of designing and construction that's going on today. Along the way, the science became unified with a construct the law.
So, the branch called the heat transfer, where thermal engineering joined the rest of the theory and became what I'm teaching today. And what I think is very, very powerful science of thermodynamics with design evolution in it.
So, where is this arrow pointing? Obviously, it's pointing toward the future. But the present, unfortunately, is a little bit complicated. Let me go back to the previous story. If you read any book of the history of physics or the history of thermodynamics, you will find a story about individuals.
The very few, the very few, beginning with the very few, beginning with the very few, beginning with Sadiq Carnot and his father, who was called named Lazar Carnot. Before that, of course, Archimedes and many of these very, very few distinguishable names.
And design evolution has its own luminaries, individuals, individuals who lived and created in places that were known for creativity and for the sanctity of the individual.
So, in this is known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be known to be
like between the American scientist and the scientific American. You see here, yeah, a joke about
what you see published these days, articles co-authored by 10 or 20 or sometimes 40 co-authors,
40 co-authors, which give the impression or attempt to perpetuate the view that better science comes from
the larger group. That is a view that's not original, it happened with the co-activization of agriculture
and the history of the 20th century is very clear about the success of that, success in quotation marks.
Well, this is the present and luckily in it, this is what's going on. In it, there are individuals just
like in the books of the history of science who by their very nature do not feel at home
marching in columns. They simply run away if they can survive or they shy away. They are not joiners.
They are happy with their ideas because only that way they can climb peaks, unlike the margin columns.
So, I end with a view of this little man conquering Mount Everest. I drew, I made a drawing in 1975
with a big pen in one stroke. 1975 is when I was leaving MIT to become a postdoc in Berkeley.
And yes, that caricature is Adrian, attracted by the idea somewhere at the very top.
And this is on the left, how it looks from that very high position. The single investigator, the one with the driven by ideas,
does two things and both are comforting. One is he steps on deadwood. Deadwood, that's a metaphor for
everything from all ideas and inactive or groups that are not created. But in front of the individual, there is an infinite
blue sky of opportunity in which the ideas could be projected, tried and implemented. So, this is the thread of
the book. Once again, on the right hand side. And I thank you for your attention.
Thank you. Thank you, Adrian.
Should I stop sharing?
You can leave it.
Okay.
Susan, would you like to begin?
Sure. Yeah, sure.
Susan, what I'd like to do is, is kind of share some insights that have occurred to me,
and get you Daniel and you Adrian, of whether you know, I'm on the evolutionary track, right? Or, you know,
or it'll give us something to riff about. So, as I reread this, and I have an autographed copy here.
It really, the impact became much more powerful for me because, one, I started understanding that
there's a correlation and there's a difference in the language here. But there's a correlation, Daniel,
that active, what the constructional law does is actually validate active inference because
what the constructional law is saying is that, yeah, nature is going to evolve based on minimizing heat
transfer or heat loss. And for energy is saying the same thing with, you know, we are driven to
minimize our free energy. Oh, no, no, no, no. Okay.
Hold on, Adrian. I said that, yeah, I know that these are two different terms,
but I'm just trying to connect this for the audience. And so I have some really specific
questions for you. So I want to kind of stay on track here and not get caught up in too much of the
definitions because one is that the audience that's going to watch this, they're probably not going to
be as astute about the hard science of thermodynamics versus the machine learning, the biology, the psychology,
the philosophy that, you know, that we really talk about here. So I'm just kind of threading that needle.
I'll just say when I, when I kind of start, start trying to capture the essence of the beauty, quite
frankly, of the constructional law, they're able to connect those, those blankets. Okay.
Let me, let me, let me respond to what you bring up. Okay.
I, I think more highly of the audience. I think the audience is astute. And even, even if, even those
like Adrian, who are not experts in a particular corner of science are able to connect the dots. And
this is why my role of teaching is to use common language whenever, whenever possible. And that is the
direction in which I, I want to push our dialogue here. I want to, I want to respond to a few things that
you said. First, design and nature or evolution is not about minimizing heat loss. It is about providing
meaning, evolutionary design, changing design, morphing design to facilitate flow or movement. And in every
example of mine, the, the mover, the mover, the answer to the question, what moves was the individual
or the group. And yes, the individuals, which is why it started with hunting and gathering, benefited as a
mover, meaning as a living body, benefited from not wasting heat from the pot of hot water. Okay.
Meaning the individual benefited from being economical. Here you see the word being economical or being
thrifty as another way of expressing the natural tendency encapsulated in the Constructor Law. So that is, that is,
that is, that is the, that is design in nature. Second, design in nature has nothing to do with what you call free energy.
It is about, it is about, it is about this moving architecture that keeps on changing. And yes,
in order to move the object, I call it the thermic system, that the entity must be pushed.
And the pushing comes from power. And the power comes from architectures, most of them natural. Some, a few of them made by people,
called engines, were functioning as engines. What those systems consume from animals to
people into the entire globe are called food, fuel and solar input.
solar input. That is, and those things, those things are not free. Those things are not free. I can give you examples of how dear
every single one is. And finally, finally, finally, you and I had a conversation via email. If the audience would like to find out what free energy means,
I would be happy to come back and give you again, common sense or common language presentation of what is meant by free energy in thermodynamics.
It is a pretty good name for something that was coined around 1860.
But no, free energy is not free.
Okay. And it is not responsible for setting things in motion or for creating changes.
Quite the opposite. Free energy is a, just like entropy, mathematical formula useful in the description of an entity
that is in perfect equilibrium with its environment. In other words, an entity that is not pushed by the surroundings or pushing the surroundings.
But it is useful for other reasons which require an hour long discussion. And yes, some illustration that I offer to produce if people are curious.
But by the way, I'm not criticizing anybody. And certainly, free energy principle is something else, not free energy. Okay. So that's the, keep in mind, these are two different notions.
And, but it's very important to be very clear about one, about the fact that in our conversation, we respect the meaning of the word.
Absolutely. And thank you for that.
Absolutely. And thank you for that. Because I mean, that actually, which enrich and my, the how I'm tying or banding these together, I kind of like to point to the economical, because that actually makes a lot of sense.
But in reading the book, what I did get a distinction of, and again, you know, I want to hear, correct me, there's not a problem, is that, you know, when we're thinking about active interference annual, you know, we're really more focused on the agents and the interactions with the agents.
And what I, what I, what I, what occurred to me, especially as I was looking through your slides, Adrian, is, you know, is that the flow architecture, one, it's, you know, it's kind of pointing us toward what is actually flowing.
And so many of our mental models are static.
And so many of our, in, in, in, in condensing the information, I was like, okay, the flow architecture is the natural things that are observable, palatable, movable, and measurable.
Okay.
And, and, and the, the flow direction, and the configuration, and the time, i.e. rhythm, is actually what is, what needs to be free.
And, and, and I pulled one thing that I thought was really rich in terms of these features, which again are contextually bound, but they're flowing together.
And one point I wanted to make was, is that they have to be, or, or ask you about in terms of how are those features needing to be independent first?
And number two is, is, is how they are flowing together.
You pointed at it in one of the slides here, but the, how they are actually more economical when they are powering together.
Well, okay.
I think it's a, you know, a really key, key aspect here.
Let me, let me respond.
It is, it, I confess early on, that's 25 years ago.
Coming from engineering, I, I saw, I saw flow first before I saw the configuration or the design flowing or changing or morphing.
The phenomenon is, is not the, the flow and the direction or for that matter, the, the decrease in the so-called flow resistance.
The phenomenon is the, the, the, the tendency of the, of the design to change, all of it to change so that, so that, that movement, which is, belongs to the body, but also to the niche around it.
That movement is facilitated.
A friend of mine the other day brought up the example of the, one of the valves moving and flapping inside the human heart.
Yes, that is, the valve is the niche, the flow is the blood flow.
The blood flow has eddies.
The blood flow is constantly morphing.
Keep in mind, the flow of liquid is, is, is complicated.
It's like stuffing a rope down the throat of a gun barrel.
It's, it's, it has configuration that's invisible to, to most mortals.
And in the case of the, of, of the living organ, the heart, the stuffing of the rope called the blood flow brings with it the, the rhythmic, the, loving deformation of the, of the flap of the valve.
And, and this is all for the benefit of the moving animal.
Yes, the freedom, the, the, the, the life.
I call it access according to construct the law.
The freedom, freedom galore.
In the description of what I just told you, there are innumerable degrees of freedom.
You know, the bending of the, of the flap, the direction of the flap, the rhythm of the flap.
And that's only about the flap.
But when I get into the eddies inside the blood flow, well, those are innumerable.
Once again, hierarchical.
A few large and many small.
And they move.
These blobs moving speak of rhythm.
But if you take a snapshot, you see hierarchy.
Yes, it's complicated, but it happened naturally.
And the direction of the happening is toward making a better and better animal.
A longer living animal, a longer traveling animal.
That is the, the, the, and why should the animal evolve in that direction?
Because the animal along with, with, with, with his or her compatriots, but is a participant in the river basin of water called humanity.
Humanity is spending water on the globe.
And morphing and evolving and getting, okay, better at moving itself, which means moving water just like any river basin or just like the hydrosphere.
And it's all a relatively boring conclusion because it's always the same conclusion.
But it is a beautiful conclusion because it makes us, on the one hand, not waste time on something that repeats itself and gives us the opportunity to come up with, with better ideas or new ideas.
Or frankly, to make a bigger noise to say, aha, aha.
And I'll say another thing before I stop.
You brought up more freedom.
Yes, it's very important in, in my, okay, modest way of teaching these things.
I show what happens if you have a, one of these morphing designs, any, anything such as a very simple
drawing of, of a river basin.
And what happens if you increase the number of degrees of freedom from one, one version of the design to the next.
So I show this with pencil and paper that as the number of degrees of freedom increases, the access, which is measured in many ways,
access increases if what flows is people walking through the streets and everything, including vehicles.
That means wealth increases in the direction of greater freedom.
And this is why it's no coincidence, no coincidence that the distribution of innovation on the globe is non-uniform,
just as non-uniform, in fact, coincides with the non-uniform distribution of wealth, wealth, and the consumption of fuel,
and all these other things that are undeniable.
So this is the coincidence to keep in mind.
And keep it in mind when you hear people calling for uniform distribution of this and uniform distribution of that,
and for certain groups to cut down in the consumption of fuel and to stop using commercial aviation because they are burning too much fuel.
Yeah, think about that.
Think about how intelligent that proposal would be.
And by the way, the reason it's not intelligent is because even if you implement it, it is calling to be replaced tomorrow,
because that kind of change is unnatural, you see?
Unnatural.
Okay, so here's where I'm confused.
And so help me to kind of pull this together, because we talk a lot about self-organizing systems and about degrees of freedom.
And what I'm kind of teasing out and maybe I'm confused, maybe not.
But yeah, what I'm as I'm digging into this and really appreciating the richness of your precision of your language.
I want to, I want to kind of capitalize on, on as, as the evolution occurs, and, and how, going back to the inequality and how the system is naturally going to lead to the different, the different areas and volumes that the point of the area and the volume, I think is, I think that's one of the richest things that you can
probably the hardest to grasp in here, but, but yeah, but the also, the more volume there is, and this is a question, then the more coalescence, the accretion, I believe, is increases, but that also leads to fragmentation.
Is that, how does that relate to the point in the area?
Let me, let me address that to you.
This big volume you referred to is one, one feature of the object or of the design is called size, size.
Everything that we use in our discussion today is about a thing with many features, including size. Size is a natural feature.
I, I started that way.
Not, not, not everything is big or not everything is, should be this small.
Yeah.
Everything should be this size. And if you, if you look carefully at the, at the literature that grew around the construct the law, you'll see many, many predictions of what the size of the bird should be, the size of this airplane should be,
and the size of this helicopter should be because size is a natural feature of the moving flow system. And so what moves is a more complicated story than accretion.
Accretion is, comes from celestial bodies where, where, let's say particles in the primordial soup attract each other and they come together.
Or forget about the, the, the thing that nobody saw, nobody saw the primordial soup, but you can look at, you can, no, you can actually look at, at the little suspensions of dust and how they, they, they,
they become aggregates, dust aggregates shaped as just like the snowflakes, snowflakes. You see this in hidden corners somewhere in a room where no one has been for about 30 years.
These dendrites of, of, of, of particles that came together because of mutual electrostatic attraction. And yes, but well, those systems by this, by this time are dead.
They are not the object of our, our discussion, although on route to those dendrites, they were alive and behaving just like any other, any other flow architecture in their case proceeding from a volume to one point.
Right. So I, I come to the, anyway, the observation is that the, the, the design in nature is, is, is not about accretion.
That's just the one, one kind of flow. It is about the, the, the whole architecture that has this purpose of enabling easier movement for the whole, the whole.
I think what's difficult here. I recognize where my peers feel difficult to grasp. The difficulty is to, to get away from the, from the, the present tendency of, of splitting hairs called, you know,
splitting too much the infinitesimal, it's called reductionism. This discussion about design in nature is about the whole. It's about the whole. It's about the,
rising above the, and, and, and, and engaging in holism, holism, holism, and, or getting away from disciplines and becoming a polymath. Okay. It's about the, and if you, if you become a polymath,
you become closer to being a polymath, you become closer to being a street person, a person who looks at this poster, this poster, reads 10 different books, 10 different books,
10 different books, not just narrow, narrow, narrow, narrow, and a person who does not live in a, in a cubicle or in a locker room, a person who has many friends, many friends,
a person who knows more than one language, a person who knows more than one language. A person is, this is the, the meaning of a truly, truly common person. And that's the invitation to the scientists to, to, to, to get out, get out of the apartment, you know, physically or figuratively and smell the roses.
roses uh because beauty beauty is uh where you don't don't expect to find it okay meaning it's
it's maybe maybe behind the house of the neighbor that's probably where the beauty is so well
this one because it's so rich but i could go on for hours i'm going to turn this back over to daniel
um yeah because i thank you so much because this has been thank you susan just in our last
minutes um i'll just add a few small points um first just beginning with the last common person
is that what is held in commons a commons person and the stewardship of the commons then in your
drawing with the mountain there was the peak up and there was the path out and it was like a person
walking on a path forward out and a river a flow and time as you began with is goal flow it flows in
the goal oriented direction yes there's more to it and it's flowing false roll downhill and uh the the
organism walks forward it can't walk backwards uh and then the last point is the uh distributions
empirical that you presented um jeffrey west and others have have highlighted that empirical aspect
of the outcomes and their uh distributions however you tied that to the point zero to one to two to
three dimensional um transfer points where from one to two is like a point spreading out on a plate and
three-dimensional is like a point radiating out these are fundamental equations that are kind of in your
engineering toolkit because they have to do with like for example heat distribution but that's just
related to the modes of vibration and the degrees of freedom of the molecules as a secondary distributional
approximation to an actual size specific and that's why there are river bifurcations that are this big
and not river bifurcations that are a micron and all these other kinds of things that are um not just
the neutral we need to explain away about nature but just straight down the middle with what the study of
nature is that's right uh yes i couldn't agree more and i get uh i get uh uh enlightened by uh by uh this kind
of commentary um and um and yes uh you mentioned jeffrey west he's one of the few uh uh in whose company i feel at home
the uh uh it's important it's important to uh to uh once again to look at uh uh
uh as life from both sides okay as in the song uh and um and uh and make a very strong effort not to become an ideologue
uh um i um i like the opposite of that which is that uh that uh
uh my students idea may be better you see uh where maybe uh i get corrected every day i teach this
course right now i teach it to a an overflow crowd um and quite quite frequently uh not every day
they correct me they say how about this and it's uh it's it's like a free food for me this sort of
reaction uh uh the listeners should pay attention i don't get these comments from my colleagues okay
i get them from these nobodies from these nobodies girl students
yes don't say that too loud it's a perfect it's a perfect note and it's one of the things i've always
loved the most is outside of the organizational structure and the shape of the building is about
the fact that it's first principles and about the opportunity though unlikelihood or not
of a transformative epistemic relationship across all language and all professional boundaries
so thank you adrian for for also living this and sharing how you've done it yeah yeah thank you so
much this has been awesome thank you to both of you until next time bye bye
thank you


















































Thank you.