SPEAKER_00:
hello and welcome this is active inference guest stream 81.1 it is april 23rd or 24th depending on where you are and we're here with hannah biddell discussing feeling our way through uncertainty thank you for joining hannah we'll have a presentation followed by a discussion section so looking forward to anyone's questions in live chat and thanks again for joining and looking forward to it


SPEAKER_01:
Thanks so much, Daniel.

I'm really looking forward to it too.

Like I said before, I've been a big fan of the YouTube channel for a long time, so it's really nice to be here.

So today I'm going to talk about some of my work in my PhD, which is about arousal coherence, which will make more sense in a moment.

But the basic topic is how we might feel our way through uncertainty, through the link between affect and interception.

So, just one minute.

All right, so I'm going to be talking about this paper that I wrote with Mark Sons, Aline Slagter and Ruben Laukonen of Neuroscience of Consciousness recently.

And we'll talk about it kind of step by step.

I will note at the get go that there is no formal modeling yet for this concept.

So this talk and the paper is basically a series of claims, which I kind of back up with other people's experiments, models and simulations.

So i'm just piecing together some Prior ideas basically and looking at where those might lead in particular Interceptive self-inference deep affective inference and Excuse me um affect in terms of precision optimization And if those aren't clear yet, it might be soon.

Hopefully uh, so

These are the basic claims that I'm going to make.

And it's going to be quite a quick talk because there's only five.

So firstly, that your autonomic arousal states track with changes on uncertainty.

And that means multiple things.

And I'll break down some of those in the next slide.

That accurately inferring autonomic arousal is important for the way that our brains estimate uncertainty.

and that affective arousal might optimize the way that how confident we are in autonomic prediction errors so it's going to affective arousal will also impact potentially the accuracy of our interoceptive autonomic inferences

Which will lead me to the kind of point of the paper, which is arousal coherence.

So that is, you can kind of see here, this is a very simple depiction, oversimplified depiction of what arousal coherence would look like.

So we have changes in autonomic arousal across time, increases and decreases.

Coherent affective arousal would be changing with the autonomic arousal, and discoherent affective arousal would be dissociated from changes in autonomic arousal.

It is not this simple, obviously, those layers of depth to change, so the simple time axis is an oversimplification, but this is a basic idea of arousal coherence.

And I think and have argued in this paper that it impacts and reflects our capacity to adapt to changes in uncertainty of multiple different kinds.

And the final point is meta-awareness of arousal.

So knowing your arousal or having a higher order representation of your arousal.

might enhance arousal coherence and I'll talk about some of the benefits associated with higher arousal coherence too.

Just quickly to mention the way that I am conceiving affective arousal is a lower order prediction.

So it's not the same as emotion, like stress, anxiety, excitement, but a high arousal is common across those kinds of emotions, whereas a relaxing state, for instance, would be a low arousal.

And if we're talking about autonomic arousal, I'd like to clarify that I'm not being very specific here about whether we're talking about sympathetic arousal or sympathetic activation or parasympathetic or the balance between those.

Just broadly, increases of autonomic arousal or decreases conceived through things like heart rate increase or changes in pupil dilation.

Okay.

So I have not included as yet a primer on active inference, given the audience and given the channel.

The basic concepts would be that I'm perceiving of action and perception as inferences in a loop, kind of inseparable.

Also looking at inferences as deep.

So one layer of inference can be nested within other layers of inference.

And that will come up, especially as we start talking about affect.

And a third concept from the active inference literature is the idea of precision as an inverse uncertainty estimate.

And so confidence in signals or confidence in beliefs.

So if anything that is unclear about what I'm talking about, especially with these terms, please just jump right in.

And I also just want to take this chance to say if anyone wants to talk about formal modeling, please let me know offline.

I'd love to talk about it.

So I'm just going to dive straight into the first claim, unless there's any questions, Daniel.

Oh, first claim, pretty simple.

Autonomic states track with changes and uncertainty.

There's a number of different lines of evidence that support this, and they date back quite a while.

The work of Ewan Dyer comes to mind in particular.

There was a lot of work in the early 2000s where they looked at different neuromodulators of autonomic arousal, in particular,

adrenaline or norepinephrine and changes in pupil dilation that relate to that, that track with changes in uncertainty.

We can also talk about the changes in volatility, changes in surprise, violations of precise expectations.

So we see these embodied changes in response to small changes in uncertainty in the environment.

I won't call it environmental uncertainty because it's not necessarily precise.

One of my favorite papers in this area was by De Boecker and his colleagues at UCL.

And they had a task, a probabilistic learning task.

So two rocks, under one of the rocks, there's a snake.

If there's a snake, you get an electric shock.

And they manipulated the probability that each rock would have a snake underneath it and looked at whether people were able to learn the associations as those associations changed over the course of the experiment.

And they found that people whose autonomic arousal responses changed with the irreducible uncertainty

we're better able to learn those probabilistic relationships.

So it's not as simple as this is some epiphenomenal, the way that your body tracks with changes and uncertainty seems to have very important impacts on how well you track uncertainty and how well you can use that information.

Another piece of evidence there is that, I can't remember the chemical's name, there's

Propofenol, I think is the name of it.

Suppressing your autonomic arousal responses.

So your pupillary and cardiac arousal reduces learning when the environment changes.

So it looks like the effects of prior beliefs increases.

So you're not updating your uncertainty as well when you don't have these embodied changes that track with uncertainty.

So that's the first claim, the autonomic arousal states track with changes and uncertainty, and it matters that they do.

Second claim is that inferring our autonomic arousal states informs uncertainty estimates.

So here I'm drawing pretty heavily on the work of Mika Arlen.

I really enjoy this interceptive self-inference idea, which is that by inferring our autonomic arousal states, we can better estimate changes in expected uncertainty.

At the simplest level, things like your heartbeat come with changes in sensory noise.

So for example, you get pulsatile blood flow across your retina and you can't see

in that instance as well.

So by anticipating those changes in your heartbeat, the brain can, or by interceptively self-inferring them, the brain can adjust expected precision accordingly.

And then we can extend that to

different layers of temporal depth.

So if your heartbeat is going to impact precision, then your heart rate over time will also have some impact on uncertainty there by extension.

So there's different levels when we're talking about autonomic states in terms of the actual state, and then we have rhythms and et cetera.

Another interesting thing to note with this idea of interceptive self-imprints is that if the brain can infer these expected states, it can likely also control these states.

So using the body to control precision trajectories.

So depending on the contextual need in the environment,

the body can change depending on uncertainty.

So we saw some indication of this in the previous slide, these changes where the body is tracking with uncertainty, maybe operating through a basic inactive interceptive self-inference.

Another example is that with perceptual uncertainty, your heart rate slows, which increases the amount of time and predictability

um uh of the diastole aspect of your heart beat and therefore um high predictability of and opportunities for high precision sensory sampling so uh

anyway that's interceptive self-inference um i think it's a fantastic idea and i want to basically with this just just layer up and look at um what might be impacting interceptive self-inference and in particular interceptive precision so to in order to infer these intercepted conditions

We need to be able to adapt intercepted precision when things change.

So typically intercepted precision would be considered quite high.

You have a lot of homeostatic states that you need to stay in.

You need your heartbeat within a certain range in order to survive, for example.

but things do change and you need to be able to adapt how confident you are in your intercepted beliefs and intercepted errors and this seems to have pretty big implications for health so um ryan smith's work recently on this i found really interesting um they gave people a

uh heartbeat tapping task and so just trying to detect their heartbeat during um interceptive perturbation so holding their breath and their modeling showed that where healthy individuals change their interceptive precision when things change um people with

symptoms of anxiety, depression, substance disorders, and eating disorders didn't change their precision estimates from resting levels.

Okay.

So that's claim two.

We can use autonomic states to inform our uncertainty estimates.

Claim three.

And this is based on a kind of gestalt of work in affective inference.

So there's a lot of people working on valence in this area.

And I've seen some really beautiful work.

And in particular, I really like Caspar Hesp et al.

's paper on this, considering higher order or affect as

deeper or I'm Trying to think the opposite of nested an embedding of lower order inferences So representing changes in lower level uncertainty at a higher level It's a kind of abstraction and that is what affect Is

We can talk more about the specifics of valence after.

But the key that I want to draw attention to here is that deviations in this uncertainty, a lower level uncertainty or lower level errors, some people call it.

Some people talk about specifically interceptive errors.

Some people talk about homeostatic errors.

Regardless, the just belt is that people are talking about

changes or unexpected deviations ascending from that lower level to a higher level of affective inference and that's where arousal seems to be key so it's an orienting towards signals that are expected to resolve future uncertainty

This links in nicely with some old ideas.

I know Soms and Fristom referred to them earlier.

FAF in 2006 talks about cortical arousal and information gain.

There's also a really nice research group, Yanasegawa in Japan, who talks about affective arousal of stimuli relating to novelty and information gain, or Bayesian surprise.

So there's a pretty consistent approach

idea here that arousal is relating to orienting towards valuable information akin to attentional selection are more specific to affective information um and a final piece here is a lovely study

by Candia Rivera and colleagues.

And they looked at heart-brain coupling during emotional experiences.

It's another reason I'm thinking affective arousal in particular is important for optimizing interceptive precision.

And they had people undergo emotional elicitation, watching videos.

And within the first few seconds, they found that the emotional stimuli were modulating, debating heartbeat activity, which in turn, uh, led to kind of arousal specific cortical response.

And then there was a bi-directional processing, which is what we kind of know about emotions affecting the body, right?

It's bi-directional.

But the key thing here for me was that the information from the body to the brain in that coupling, that information flow was modulated by affective arousal in particular and not valence or anything else.

So how aroused you said you felt

was modulating how much information was kind of coming up to your brain from your body after the initial kind of activation um okie dokie i apologize this one's a bit text heavy um but we're almost at the end so uh this is where arousal coherence comes in

again the relationship between or correlation between autonomic arousal and affective arousal within a person across time um so uh

Recapping a little bit, if affective states recruit bodily signals or specifically the outcomes of interceptive inferences, errors or not, to model the current states of affairs and changes in autonomic arousal reflect and enact changes in uncertainty and precision.

then affective arousal, I'm suggesting, might reflect this minimally metacognitive, to quote Pest, a mechanism through which the precision of interceptive self-imprints can be regulated and represented at a conscious level.

And I think that this is important and ties back potentially to the work with Ryan Smith and this, I believe that's the,

this page here, sort of failure to adapt interceptive precision in response to autonomic changes.

I think this is where affective arousal comes in and this coherence is the capacity to adapt interceptive precision according to changes in autonomic states.

And I think based on the

relationship between autonomic arousal and uncertainty then that arousal coherence might shape the responsiveness especially at this conscious level to changing levels of uncertainty so through the body into the environment um and then if we can

monitor and track the changing uncertainty then we can better use it to shape our learning and so we'll see better adaptation to the environment we'll see better mental well-being etc and there is some evidence for that although with the caveat that most of the research that's looked at what i'm calling arousal coherence here

We'll pick an autonomic marker, so heart rate, pupil dilation, something like that.

And then usually it's an emotion that is used to track, so stress, anxiety, excitement, regardless of valence, some emotion.

So there's a slight caveat there in the methodological domain.

that we're talking about affective arousal and not emotion exactly, but there is quite a decent literature now showing that something like arousal coherence is linked to better emotional awareness, better self-regulation, better well-being, lower anxiety, lower depression, lower inflammatory biomarkers, etc.

So there is a

There's some research that pointing towards this being potentially the case.

And I'll, I'll talk about some of my empirical stuff, which will come later.

Um, final claim.

Um, I mean, these two, these last two are not in any particular order, but meta awareness of arousal, I think is a really important concept here.

Um,

I'm drawing on the work of Sandford Smith and their paper of meta-awareness or meta-control of attention.

I think arousal acts somewhat similarly to attention, so it fits reasonably well, but meta-awareness of arousal I'm treating as a higher order monitoring and control over these lower order arousal processes in particular.

This meta-awareness, I think, will shape the responsiveness of these lower order sources of arousal to errors, including intercepted errors, autonomic errors, unexpected conditions in the body.

And there's also some evidence that training this meta-awareness of arousal can increase coherence.

They found that meditators had a higher arousal coherence.

basically sitting with arousal, like during meditation, potentially also during like hormetic practices, like having an ice bath or breath work or things like this.

I might train the capacity to learn about arousal, basically, rather than the default regulation strategies that we might have, like sleep.

So facilitate learning about arousal and you'll have that higher order

and learning, you can also use that to regulate.

So if I put all of those claims together, it kind of looks like a figure that we had in the paper.

Again, this is not exactly precise because trying to present different levels of temporal depth within this image, I found rather difficult.

But the basic idea

kind of in the claims, autonomic arousal is tracking changes in uncertainty and unexpected changes there can inform future precision estimates.

Above that, affective arousal, I'm seeing a higher level of temporal and abstract debt.

Affective arousal has expectations of interceptive conditions and also precision over interceptive conditions.

That is determined there, optimized by affective arousal, and then at a higher level, meta-arousal

can learn about the precision weighting errors in affective arousal.

So when affective arousal might have more noise coming from the autonomic level, for instance, by being meta-aware of your feelings of affective arousal, you may become more aware that, for instance, your heart rate is not matching with your feeling of stress.

simple level um and increasing arousal coherence basically facilitates the information about changing uncertainty from the autonomical level up into the conscious level um yeah so just returning to those basics

claims um maybe I have a couple of future directions um that I'd like to talk about and we can talk about these more in a discussion I have

I have 50 million things that I would like to do with this concept and measurement next.

I'm really excited because it's so easily measured, even though there are methodological constraints.

So I'm expecting and testing whether arousal coherence is associated with more adaptive updating of uncertainty estimates.

um the paper by de burka and colleagues that i spoke about at the very beginning the probabilistic learning paper they have kindly shared their data with me so been able to have a look at how coherence might relate to that i think it's bad form to talk about results before they're written up so maybe i won't but i'll um

I'll dangle that there.

There's something with probabilistic learning.

I'm also looking at how arousal coherence relates with emotional awareness and emotional self-regulation again.

So extending on prior work by people like Sasha Somersfelt and Richie Davis.

They've kind of already found these wellbeing links, but I am wanting to look specifically if it has to do with

higher order affective, like updating higher order affective representations and not getting stuck.

And then another direction would be that interventions increasing better awareness of arousal.

So mindfulness, hormetic practices, things like ice baths, breath work would lead to increased arousal coherence.

Yeah.

Excuse me.

And basically that cultivating arousal coherence will help us to navigate uncertainty.

That's the key.

We can fill our way through it.

Just two additional things to note.

One, this data is readily available pretty much everywhere.

There's so many papers out there that have looked at high arousal emotions or just affective arousal in conjunction with some measure of autonomic arousal across time and some simple linear mixed modeling.

You can look at arousal coherence in relationship to

various indicators which is what i've done my entire phd is secondary data and so if you have some of that data and you want to look at it let me know and you know actually i think i'll leave it there because uh

The other things I imagine might come up when we chat anyway.

While I have a chance, just another opportunity to say thanks to these legends.

It was so delightful to get to work with Ruben, Helene and Mark on my first first author paper.

What a treat.

And also two very helpful reviewers who gave much more feedback and much more helpful feedback than I had been led to expect by all the reviewer to memes.

And that's it.


SPEAKER_00:
Thank you.

You could leave the slides up and yeah, let's discuss.

And if anyone has questions they can ask and I'll read it.

Okay.

While people are typing their questions, like what led you to study this intersection of topics for your PhD?


SPEAKER_01:
So I was really interested at the very beginning of my PhD, it's been quite a journey, about why some people are better at dealing with uncertainty than others.

I guess you would call it me-search.

So I started with looking at when people's worldviews are threatened and some people can kind of roll with that, take that on board and then other people lose their mind.

And I suspected that it had something to do with embodiment based on just looking at the people around me who were better at dealing with uncertainty.

And then I came across Carl Friston's work and started looking at free energy.

in particular and and links between uh making links in my mind between free energy and arousal uh and then fortuitously came across sasha somerfeld's work so these things all happened within the span of a month trying to answer this first question and then

received the framework and then looked at the measurements like, ah, these really seem to add up together.

And so it was just really, really nice timing in terms of the way that I was reading things.

Cool.

Um, yeah, I mean, I've just been, I think I've just been really lucky about the time in my, uh, in the,

intellectual field that i've kind of arrived in because all of these ideas are as you might have seen just these just other people's ideas that i really like that have just put like this on top of each other yeah like the novelty and the speed and other factors the unifying kind of spirit make it so that the layering is very fine and very fun exactly exactly


SPEAKER_00:
um okay so it's a kind of like reflect how I was seeing it and how you layered the argument I was thinking about drinking coffee before studying and about how that's this kind of general pharmacological intervention and on the first claim you had one of the pieces of experiment was about the pharmacological intervention so it's kind of like

it's an obvious way to think about what these interventions do but those are entering the body and then it's interesting that the directionality of learning it's like the natural variation in learning and the arousal it is happening in the same pattern as the intervention would suggest

so in that i kind of like saw the the bringing together of of experiments which like in humans or in any species you can never always have exactly the experiment um so that kind of brought together the idea that the learning rate is related to the excitement in the body um yeah

and then that gets very embodied when again an obvious kind of corollary of a slower heart rate is more time in between pulses to have high precision measurements

So there's like a few kind of just very first pass body bases for heart rate and for pharmaceutical interventions that otherwise the connection between like the body's status and even the learning rate can feel very abstract when it's like the least abstract thing possible.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

And I think Mika Allen's work on that has been really helpful for me to conceive of that.

Like, okay, obviously your brain needs to predict what's going on in your body so that it can account for those changes that your, your body, the impacts that your body has on uncertainty.

Um, another thing that, that I've just been reminded of is as you were talking about the learning rate is, um, so I I'm conceiving of this as,

like embodied extent, uncertainty processing extended into the body.

So predictive processing is not restricted to the brain.

It's a whole, it's an organismic process.

But that said, these things that we're talking about, the different, the changes in autonomic states might be represented also in the, well, likely are represented also in the brain.

So not going to make a claim about necessarily if it's all brain or if it's also brain and body.

i think body but the locus ceruleus um so the key source of noradrenaline the arousal kind of hormone in the brain uh there was a lovely paper by sales and colleagues i think it was 2019 where they showed locus ceruleus um activity tracking with bayesian surprise as well also linking uh with learning rates so

I think arousal and learning rates are very clearly linked.


SPEAKER_00:
yes okay we're back in the coffee and the studying and the coffee just have another sip and we're we're learning through time hopefully about like how excited or revved up to be for the learning rate of the topic that we're studying and then in figure one

the the precision had this kind of swoop because it went slowly down as the coherence increased but then at the very end it kind of ticked up so what made you have that little uptick there or what was that representing so that i um


SPEAKER_01:
I didn't mean as much by it as you might have done, but I'm sorry.

I was trying to, with these different levels, kind of indicate that these are different timescales.


SPEAKER_00:
Like, I think it could be a slip that is informative.


SPEAKER_01:
It could be a Freudian slip.


SPEAKER_00:
On the far end of, like, synchrony, that's also an uninformative state.


SPEAKER_01:
that's very true.

Yeah.


SPEAKER_00:
And so it becomes the precision explodes.

So it's kind of like there's one impulse is to have higher sensory resolution, but then that is accompanied by, um,

lower heart rate so lower ability to like do motor activity so if you're doing long exercise or something like that like you you couldn't necessarily just switch on a dime but then at the slower time scale you you could relax to have better sensory acuity but if you're moving fast it doesn't necessarily matter as much but then if you're like too coherent you're like having like a sleepy seizure or something like that


SPEAKER_01:
yeah i think that this is a this is a really important point and and the paper kind of might gloss over it a little bit um but with the in general arousal coherence i think is a positive state

but not necessarily over time.

So we talk a little bit in there about how in certain kinds of processing, like for example, in like unrelenting grief or really acute stress, it's probably more adaptive to turn off

that like to down weight your interceptive signals there and not be coherent and we see um grief and and suppression are typically associated with lower coherence so it's not that it's always for the best um i think this like capacity of meta arousal

is likely more important so being able to adjust whether it's coherent or not but on average coherence is a better state to reside in or in terms of getting more information or being able to navigate uncertainty better but that's not necessarily what we always need to do sometimes we just need to be stable and you know


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, like shock.

It's kind of like something's just stuck.

And so the fact that the mutual information between the body's state and the cognitive state, the mutual information being low, it's not necessarily a bad thing.

It's like a mechanism.


SPEAKER_01:
Protective, yeah.

It's a protective and it can be processed later potentially, but it doesn't.


SPEAKER_00:
Then kind of moving through the claims, getting to where we have the consciously representable nature of arousal.

And it isn't arousal itself that we directly perceive.

This is kind of thinking about the interoception as inference because we could have kind of a

first pass like how excited am i but then check in and like find out otherwise or have the biomarkers otherwise like trying to guess your your blood pressure so then i thought about studying with the coffee and a lot of the things with the pupil which represents the arousal and then another eye related phenotype with the saccade which represents the epistemic value

Those movements and muscle contractions are basically subliminal.

Most people, probably almost all people, cannot control their saccade.

So there's a layer that is slower than reading across the page.

that we could access and that's that kind of like arousal layer so it just is like there's things that are too fast like if it were otherwise then we'd be having a different live stream asking why we couldn't perceive something else but in the ways that we have our attention now

um there are things that are just happening faster that we don't pay attention to like syntax and letter recognition and then this is kind of moving into okay well what is that slower process that is necessarily slower and different than the primary kind of like domain specific inference


SPEAKER_01:
I mean, I'm thinking of that as affect, I guess.

As one instance, I think there is also an argument to be made that attention is doing a similar job.

Yeah.

Have I understood your question correctly?


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah.

So if you're thinking about like the lowest level, for example, being heartbeat and then heart rate and then changes in heart rate, according to

something at a bigger level i don't know some other cycle circadian rhythm yeah that's what i was going to ask what is the arousal and affect nested within and what does that mean uh arousal as in autonomic or arousal as in affective nested within because i i treat them as different okay maybe clarify it then how do you yeah sorry i'm thinking of autonomic arousal as uh

lower level inference than affective, but higher level than, for instance, the actual autonomic interceptive inferences.

So you're inferring a heartbeat, for instance, or in your heart expecting that, and then above that expecting things like heart rate or changes across time.

And then up at higher levels, and it's not a precise this level, this level, but up above that affective inference as a kind of minimal form of metacognition, including over-interceptive information, but not exclusive to interceptive information.

So you can have affective states, even if your interceptive changes or autonomic changes are suppressed.

And then above affective states, I'm imagining the metacognition, not minimal, but actual meta-awareness of those affective arousal states.


SPEAKER_00:
Like knowing that we know those states?

Being able to actually...


SPEAKER_01:
Well, both.

Being able to actually report on those states, I think, is very different from feeling those states.

And the subjective feeling experience, which someone was just talking about as like your minimal consciousness, the feeling of being is a very different thing from being able to say what you feel and self-report on that.

In my opinion, there are some other people who agree with me.

There's probably people who don't.

That's fine.

Uh, so, um, yeah, a bit of nesting, nesting, nesting is how I'm conceiving of this.

And it's not, uh, by any means because the modeling hasn't been done.

I think it's not a precise, this was layer one, this was layer two, this was layer three.

Um, by just pointing that these things do appear to be nested within each other and of course have a bi-directional relationship.


SPEAKER_00:
Yeah, it's very interesting.

A big motivator or I guess kind of pragmatic implication, you said that having a better

representation that was conscious whether just naturally like variation in how well people can self-represent um or the trainings that that might be possible like it could be used to shape our responsivity to the environment and learning so like what would it look like or what would that mean


SPEAKER_01:
So I think that's the best way to answer that question.

I think the simplest way to put it is that we know the world through our body.

Like our body is our medium of relating to the world.

And so interoceptive inferences are necessarily kind of involved with how we perceive what's going on outside of us by being kind of

We think about coherence as a kind of interceptive accuracy of changing conditions.

So you're integrating.

It's like an integrative accuracy over interceptive conditions or autonomic conditions.

that accuracy shapes for example interoceptive self-inference and the capacity of the brain to predict you know the pulsatile blood flow when that's going to happen over your eyes so impact

How it adjusts precision according to changes that are actually happening in your body and how well it can enact those changes according to the needs of the environment.

And by that, I mean changes in uncertainty in the environment.

Does that make sense?

I'm not sure if I rambled a little bit there.


SPEAKER_00:
Like, I think it's a very, it's a very exciting bundle.

Because these are things, these are cycles that we go through on minute by minute and day after day.

And

that where that kind of took me and what reading the paper made me wonder about was like entering in that learning example studying for the from the textbook but also that could be a squirrel learning about the environment or it could be having a memory of a new experience so it's not just like a domain learning but it's like you could kind of focus attention on the the

primary inference problem like look harder at the letters so there's a kind of like attention to the primary sensory um aspects which on one pass it's kind of like well that's how you

interpret the word better but this is like suggesting that there's also like a higher order entry point for improving our learning which would be like to be monitoring our own awareness and and our embodiment and like well that equation made me made my heart rate increase just to see it or this is making me sleepy i'm bored this is making me frustrated like those kinds of inferences

they're not a waste of time because they would actually set up the scaffold for the more adaptive interpretation of the lower level sensory data.

But if you just entered in at the sensory data, you might be missing out on the affective part.


SPEAKER_01:
Yes, I agree.

I think that's a...

I think it's a really exciting area for looking into in the future because we can test these things.

We have that capability to test people's intercepted inferences, for instance, and readily available on mobile.

I'm personally quite excited to go down that path.

And I agree that

there is a, yeah, there's something to be gained from treating feelings as information across multiple levels.

And it's not a new idea, obviously.

So, um, there is always this, I mean, there's been this idea, I think that the Schwartz maybe, uh, feelings, Clore and Steinbeck, apologies.

And like I said earlier, I don't have Google, but, um, yeah, feeling, um,

Treating feelings as information or seeing feelings as information, I think is really valuable and not yet explored as much as it could be.

We haven't optimized that, I guess.


SPEAKER_00:
and i think a few ways in which the syntheses that you have kind of though i don't know all the details of what's been done can maybe go beyond just saying that there's a correlation um like the two things that come to mind is first off it goes beyond saying that it that emotions are affect or awareness are informative

because it's not just like well you could tune into the that stream or you could tune into the sensory stream by making them explicitly nested mechanistically then you can you're you can learn from both bi-directionally like and then the second important piece is um by connecting it to the biometrics like the heart rate and the variability and the pupil

then there's a kind of less emotional entry point like webcams could report on our pupil who knows who already is tracking that information but then that gives it gives an entry point that isn't like asking how one feels which is a very challenging and involved question to answer and and and intercept around and some people are terrible at it they don't know


SPEAKER_01:
there's big individual variability and I guess the point of my work is like that variability matters it's informative how well you know how you feel or how well how you feel lines up with your body I guess is a better way to say that yeah and that variability like within and across levels it can't be and the goal is not to like clamp it


SPEAKER_00:
because we're always rotating positions, standing up, sitting down, doing all these things that you can't lock on to a value for, which is why the kind of skeleton of the model is just about how the variabilities connect rather than like a number or like a final kind of just equation to describe it across settings.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, I would like to come up with some equations.

So it would be a nice future direction, I think.

I do think that this kind of thing is possibly usable for treatment, for assessing the effectiveness of interventions, for instance.

Basically, if you can tune into your body more through your feelings.

and whether that's valuable.

I would really like to talk about the experimental evidence that I think would back up what I'm talking about more with the learning external uncertainty.

Maybe I could come back and talk about that when we've at least got a preprint.

I feel like it

it's maybe bad for them to talk about it in advance.


SPEAKER_00:
But it's cool to see like how over these even slower, slower timelines that the research threads can come together and how they can be brought together.

with a lot of the other technical work that is out there.

And then I think that's sort of the question that it's exciting to ask is like what data sets are already out there, where descriptive statistics can be done, what generative models can be made.

And just by what you wrote to separate things out into what's an observation and what's a statistical relationship, like the information is all there.


SPEAKER_01:
Yeah, and there's a whole lot more that I haven't talked about.

Reviewers and collaborators are like, please just stop talking.

Stop talking.

You're saying too much.

So, yeah, there's a lot.

There is so much literature that kind of fits into this framework out there and I think is, yeah, it's exciting.

It's exciting and it's easily measurable, again, with the caveat of the

emotions versus you know and and we talked about kind of you know self-reporting on arousal is not necessarily the same as feeling it so really trying to work out whether this difference is happening at the level of self-report or happening at the level of feeling or in between that and the interception exactly where that's coming it's a little bit difficult to pinpoint because

measuring feelings for instance is quite difficult in measuring self-report that may be a different thing um but that said there's yeah i i've managed it i had three research papers all pre-existing data all really interesting topics and wonderful people who were just willing to

share and collaborate on these.

So it looks like this arousal concept relates with, like I said, well-being things and that's reasonably well established already.

But I guess the key point that I'm going after is the relationship with navigating uncertainty in the external world.

how this relates to that through interceptive self-influence.

It's my affective interceptive self-influence is my proposal.


SPEAKER_00:
Is there anything else you want to add or ask or like mention?


SPEAKER_01:
I...

I'm very open to talking about it.

I haven't done the modeling.

I don't have a mathematics background.

So if anyone that does wants to talk about it, please hit me up.

If you have data sets, if you have hypotheses, you want to talk about it.

If you want to see my code, it's on OSF.

Yeah, that's it.

Yeah, I'm very keen to talk about it.

See if I can take it somewhere more interesting, make it a little bit more precise, make it usable.

Thanks so much for having me.

It's such a pleasure.


SPEAKER_00:
Congratulations on the PhD.

Thanks, I haven't got it yet.

Almost, almost.

Until next time.


SPEAKER_01:
Until next time.

I'm looking forward to it.

Thanks, Daniel.

Bye.